This is the source code for the [website][] of the *Journal of Southern
Religion*, a peer-reviewed, open-access scholarly journal devoted to the
study of religion in the American South.

This site is generated by [Jekyll][] and various other libraries.

## Branches

The `master` branch contains the development version. See tags and other
branches as necessary.

## Installing

You will need the version of Ruby specified in the `.ruby-version` file.
You will then have to install the necessary gems by running
`bundle  install`. You can then use `rake preview` or `rake pow` (if you
have Pow installed) to generate and preview the site.

Here is a more verbose guide to installing the necessary Ruby and gems if you're on a Mac. If you're on Linux, you don't need help; if you're on Windows, you're on your own.

First install [Homebrew](http://brew.sh/). (Install some software to install other software to install other software to install other software.)

```
ruby -e "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/master/install)"
```

Now install [rbenv](https://github.com/rbenv/rbenv) and ruby-build. (Install some software to install other software to install other software.)

```
brew update
brew install rbenv ruby-build
echo 'eval "$(rbenv init -)"' >> ~/.bash_profile
```

Open a new terminal tab. Navigate to the folder with the JSR.

Install Ruby 2.1.4. (Install some software to install other software.)

```
rbenv install 2.1.4
rbenv rehash
```

Make sure you have the right Ruby.

```
ruby --version
which ruby
```

Now install the software we actually want.

```
gem install bundler
rbenv rehash
bundle install
rbenv rehash
```

Now run the site.

```
bundle exec rake preview
```

## License

The markup and code for this site is copyrighted by Lincoln Mullen, and
licensed under the terms of the MIT License. You are free to use the
markup for whatever purpose you wish. In general, this includes all
files outside of the `issues/`, `_posts/`, and other content
directories. See the file `LICENSE-code.txt` for the full license.

The content for this site is copyrighted by the Journal of Southern
Religion, and licensed [CC-BY][]. The content files include but are not
limited to those in the `issues/`, `_posts`, and `assets/podcast/`
directories.

The site includes other libraries, which are available under their
respective licenses.

## Contact

Lincoln Mullen\
Web Editor, *Journal of Southern Religion*\
<lincoln+jsr@lincolnmullen.com>

  [website]: http://jsr.fsu.edu
  [Jekyll]: http://jekyllrb.com
  [CC-BY]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/deed.en_US
