---
layout: article
title: "Review: Dixie Dharma"
author-first: John L.
author-last: Crow
author: John L. Crow
author-note: "John L. Crow is a Ph.D. candidate in Religion at Florida State University."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Jeff Wilson. <em>Dixie Dharma: Inside a Buddhist Temple in 
the American South.</em> Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2012. 281 pp.
ISBN 9780807835456."
---

In his numerical assessment of the religiosity of the South historian
Ted Ownby writes, "What makes the South religiously distinctive is the
large portion of evangelical Protestants."[^1] Jeff Wilson's new book
about Buddhism in the South takes this regional truism and examines how
a minority religion in the South negotiates its surroundings. More
generally, he asserts that regionalism plays a significant role in
shaping American Buddhism, noting that "people in different parts of
America experience Buddhism through lenses and circumstances supplied by
the surrounding culture, and Buddhism impacts how these people navigate
their regional culture" (218). The southern brand of this faith,
however, has the unique challenge of adapting to a region where Buddhism
is very much a minority. In documenting these adaptations, Wilson
broadens both studies of American Buddhism as well as religious
regionalism.

Wilson begins with surveys of studies related to his topic. He notes
that Buddhism receives little attention in southern religious
historiography.And in studies of American Buddhism, the regional focus
tens to be on the West Coast or in New England. With these two
observations in mind, he writes, "this book is an exploration of two
themes---pluralism and regionalism" (4). Wilson pursues these themes
through a case study of a multi-tradition Buddhist temple called the
Ekoji Buddhist Sangha of Richmond, Virginia. Because Buddhism is such a
small part of Richmond's religious landscape, Wilson demonstrates the
ways various Buddhist traditions share space and practices while also
creating a place for newcomers, many of whom come from a Protestant
background. For instance, he notes how there is little advertising and
many of the new members refrain from sharing their newfound religious
leanings with their family and friends. Similarly, the temple had to
fight for years to obtain tax exempt status because the practices did
not match the congregational model that the city government expected.
This was such a contentious issue that the temple building itself was
almost auctioned off to pay for the back taxes that the city claimed the
temple owned.

Among the more compelling illustrations of the book comes when Wilson
recounts a slave trade meditation vigil held in 2008 to "bear witness"
to the legacy of slavery in Richmond. Taking place near a statue at
Richmond's Slave Trade Reconciliation Triangle, a group of about twenty
Buddhists from Ekoji and other temples, gathered on a Saturday morning
to silently walk the trail slaves trod to the auction house, and then
sit meditating in the noonday sun, contemplating the suffering of so
many sold into slavery.

In addition to examining isolated instances such as these, Wilson also
addresses broader themes at work in American and southern Buddhism. For
example, he spends a great deal of time looking at the practice of Pure
Land Buddhism by both Euro-Americans and Asians. Pure Land rarely gets
attention in studies of American Buddhism, and when it does, it is
usually regulated to Asian immigrants. Wilson demonstrates how Pure Land
co-manifests with Zen, Vipassana, Tibetan, and other traditions by a
predominantly Euro-American population that generally converts to
Buddhism as adults. Wilson claims that this environment generates much
more liberal and hybrid Buddhists. He calls these individuals
"pluralistic Buddhists." "They may strongly identify with a particular
lineage," Wilson explains, "but have one or two practices picked up from
other sources, or they may actively seek to incorporate multiple forms
of Buddhism into their religious life" (148). Two primary factors for
this kind of pluralism, significant to southern Buddhism, are the small
size of the groups and the lack of full-time, resident teachers.

Despite being an excellent examination of one Buddhist temple in the
South, one could hardly summarize the state of southern Buddhism based
on one temple. Wilson would be the first one to acknowledge this.
Atlanta, Houston, and Charlotte are a few of the booming metropolitan
environments where Buddhism has grown and adapted to its surroundings.
Indeed, urbanization, immigration, and economics all contribute to
determine where Buddhists congregate. As such, Wilson suggests that
America can be divided into eight different regions, each of which
Buddhism "seems to differ in discernible ways from that in the other
regions" (36).

Overall Wilson's contribution to American religious history and American
Buddhist studies is admirable. He successfully demonstrate that
regionalism is important and a useful lens when studying religious
tradition. Additionally, Wilson asks those on the West Coast or New
England to pause and consider regionalism as they generalize about the
state of Buddhism in America. And to scholars of southern religion, he
challenges them to examine religion outside the evangelical Protestant
stronghold. No doubt, Wilson is only beginning a conversation that he
hopes others will join.


[^1]: Ted Ownby, "Evangelical but Differentiated: Religion by the Numbers," in *Religion and Public Life in the South: In the Evangelical Mode*, ed. Charles Reagan Wilson and Mark Silk (Lanham, Md.: AltaMira Press, 2005), 33.
