---
layout: article
title: "Catholicism in the Early South"
author-first: Maura Jane
author-last: Farrelly
author: Maura Jane Farrelly
author-note: "Maura Jane Farrelly is assistant professor of American 
studies and director of the Journalism Program at Brandeis University."
vol: 14
year: 2012
---

The Catholic Church in America began in a southern context, and
Catholicism was the first form of Christianity to take root in the
American South. Sixteen years before Sir Walter Raleigh attempted to
found the first British colony in North America, thirty-seven years
before the Virginia Company of London set up shop along the banks of the
James River, and fifty years before the first English Calvinists
anchored their ships on the tip of the arm of Massachusetts Bay, Spanish
priests were serving soldiers on what eventually became known as Parris
Island, South Carolina, and Jesuits were working to convert Algonquian
Indians along what was then called the "Ajac√°n Peninsula," between the
James and the York Rivers that empty into the Chesapeake Bay.[^1] 

The Catholic presence in colonial Virginia and South Carolina, of
course, would not last for long. While the Escamacu Indians who
converted on Parris Island seem to have remained Catholic into the early
years of the seventeenth century, the Spanish were gone from the Port
Royal Sound by 1587. Catholicism, however, continued to grow in other
parts of the South---eventually dominating the religious landscape in
Louisiana and parts of Florida and assuming an English accent in
Maryland at the time of that colony's founding in 1634.

Nevertheless, the religious history of the South---be it colonial,
antebellum, Reconstruction, or Civil Rights-era---has been an almost
exclusively Protestant and evangelical story. By that same token, the
history of Catholicism in the United States has been an almost
exclusively northern and urban story, in spite of the fact that the
first Catholics to live in the United States were located primarily in
the slaveholding states of Maryland and Kentucky, and there were more
Catholic dioceses in the South than there were in the North until
1850.[^2] 

The primary reason evangelical Protestantism has dominated the religious
history of the South, and northern urbanism has dominated the American
history of the Catholic Church, is simple: numbers. In spite of the
bravado with which I began this essay, boldly staking a claim for
Catholicism on the colonial southern landscape, the reality is that the
vast majority of people living in the region---white, black, and Native
American, alike---were unchurched in the seventeenth and early
eighteenth centuries. Moreover, it was not until Baptist, Methodist, and
Presbyterian evangelicals made the inhabitants of the South their
personal project that the South became the "Bible Belt" that journalists
have been writing about ever since H.L. Mencken spent a few historically
significant days in Dayton, Tennessee, in 1925.[^3]

As far as Catholicism goes, the Church has been the largest denomination
in the United States since 1850 because of the massive waves of
Irish---and then German, Italian, Polish, Hungarian, and Latin
American---immigration that began hitting the shores of New York and
Massachusetts in the 1830s. Indeed, between 1830 and 1860, the Catholic
population in the United States grew by more than 900 percent, and by
the outbreak of hostilities between the North and the South in April
1861, there were more Catholics living in the Diocese of Boston alone
than there were in all eleven states that would ultimately secede from
the Union, plus Maryland---the state that was home to the oldest diocese
in the United States and had been the epicenter of English-speaking
American Catholicism for more than 200 years.[^4] 

Immigration to cities like New York, Boston, Cincinnati, and Chicago was
the driving force behind the growth of the Catholic Church in America in
the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. It is not surprising,
then, that so much of the scholarship on American Catholic history has
focused on urban centers in the Northeast and Midwest---and on the
process of "Americanization" that Catholicism experienced following its
nineteenth-century incarnation as an immigrant church.

The relationship between Catholicism and American culture has not been
natural or easy. The Church is not a democracy; it is a corporate body
that until very recently (1965) did not subscribe to the notion that the
proper relationship between the Church and the State was one of
"separate spheres" or to the belief that religious pluralism was an
ideal to be embraced and encouraged. True freedom for Catholics is not
the purview of the individual, the way it is for most Americans; true
freedom is to be found only within the community, and with the guidance,
of the Catholic Church. Immigrant Catholics, therefore, who had been
raised in the hierarchical, "ultramontane" tradition that the Vatican
started cultivating in Europe following the anti-clericalism of the
French Revolution had to adapt to---and adopt---the individualistic,
rights-oriented values that dominated the political, economic, social,
and religious culture of their new country.[^5] 

The transition was far from seamless---thanks not just to the rabid
anti-Catholicism of Protestant leaders like Theodore Parker, Lyman
Beecher, Samuel Buchard, and Paul Blanschard, but also to the religious
and ethnic parochialism that was encouraged by Catholic leaders like
Archbishop John Hughes of New York and Archbishop Francis Kenrick of
Philadelphia. While it is true that Protestants did not want "slavish"
Catholics threatening their supposedly free and liberal society, it is
also true that many Catholic clergy did not want their parishioners
fraternizing too closely with dangerously individualistic Protestants.
As a consequence, from the 1840s until the end of the Second World
War---if not the post-Vatican II era of the 1960s and
1970s---Catholicism in America was characterized by what historian Garry
Wills has called a "ghetto mentality" that encouraged Catholics to
settle in the same urban enclaves, send their children exclusively to
Catholic schools, and cluster in occupations that were dominated not
just by Catholics, but often by people who had the same ethnic
backgrounds.[^6]

Until recently, many, if not most, of the scholars writing about the
American Catholic experience grew up within this "ghetto" tradition that
defined American Catholicism for more than 100 years. This reality, too,
in addition to the numbers, is the reason historians have tended to
focus on the period between 1840 and 1960, the years when the ghetto
tradition took root in America and thrived, and on the urban north,
where the considerable concentration of Catholics made parochialism
possible.[^7]

But the times have certainly been changing. Younger scholars who grew up
in the 1980s and 1990s, and without the Baltimore Catechism, are now
writing about the history of the American Catholic Church, untouched
(and unscathed) by the experience of the Catholic ghetto. In a
particularly refreshing development, American Catholicism has also
become a topic of interest for scholars who are not even
Catholic.[^8] Add to these changes the push within the fields of
southern and colonial history for a more layered, "Atlantic" approach to
the region and the period---one that extends the boundaries of the
colonial South beyond those of Virginia and appreciates that in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the British, French, and Spanish
colonies of the South were "ground zero" for a host of imperial
rivalries that had economic, political, and religious manifestations.
From these developments, you get a small, but growing body of
scholarship that considers the experiences of lay and clerical Catholics
in the colonial South.[^9]

This recent scholarship, interestingly enough, has not entirely
abandoned the old fascination with Americanization, though some of the
newer scholarship has deliberately avoided the word "Americanization"
because of the term's republican implications and its tendency to build
up an oppositional relationship between "American" and "European"
Catholicism that a handful of scholars consider to be false.[^10] But
even when the scholarship has eschewed the word "Americanization," the
focus has still been on the ways in which Catholics and Catholicism
changed when they were placed in an American context. Scholars have
asked how and why priests, nuns, and lay Catholics took responsibility
for their religious identity in climates that were culturally hostile
and institutionally poor. They have also explored how Catholics'
collective and individual responses to the local circumstances they
encountered in the colonial South shaped American Catholicism into a
religious creature that, to this day, is unlike anything found anywhere
else in the Catholic world.

## Papist Patriots

America's first Catholics---that is to say, the Catholics who oversaw
America's transition from a collection of British colonies to an
autonomous republic---were southerners, slaveholders, ardent
republicans, and enthusiastic revolutionaries. Catholics from Maryland,
some of them priests, joined the independence movement, even as their
co-religionists in Europe condemned the war as a "sedition" that was
"worthy of damnation." Additionally, their compatriots in North America
labeled George III's toleration of Catholics in Quebec "intolerable" and
insisted that the war was an effort to keep the British colonial people
free from a "most cruel tyranny in Church and State" that was "fed with
blood by the Roman Catholic doctrines."[^11] 

Catholics supported the Revolutionary War in numbers that were
proportionally greater than those of their Protestant contemporaries. An
astounding seventy-nine percent of the 145 Catholic men who married in
St. Mary's County between 1767 and 1784 swore their allegiance to the
free state of Maryland, donated money and supplies to the American war
effort, and served in the Continental Army or the St. Mary's County
Militia. Fifty-eight percent of the men who belonged to the Jesuits'
congregation at St. Inigoes Manor in 1768 did the same, and an analysis
of the lives of more than two thousand men from St. Mary's County who
aided the independence movement reveals that more than half of them were
probably Catholic---at a time when Catholics represented between
twenty-five and thirty-two percent of the population of St. Mary's
County.[^12]

In contrast, the most generous estimates argue that just forty to
forty-five percent of the white population in all thirteen colonies
actively supported the independence movement, and that average includes
Massachusetts and Virginia, where support for the Revolution may have
been as high as sixty percent. Maryland was home to one of the largest
contingents of Loyalist soldiers, and Maryland's merchants were among
the last to sign on to the colonial non-importation agreement in the
wake of the Stamp Act.[^13] Protestants in the colony seem to have been
quite ambivalent about independence; that ambivalence, however, was not
shared by their Catholic neighbors.

Why, though, did a movement that emphasized individual rights,
challenged traditional authority, and came wrapped in the mantle of
anti-Catholicism resonate with a group of people who subscribed to a
hierarchical, communally-oriented faith like Catholicism? And why were
America's first Catholics so willing to take the independent, republican
attitude that animated their approach to politics into their church?
Historians, after all, have long noted (and the more apologetically
Catholic among them have lamented) the phenomenon of "lay trusteeism"
within the early American church, whereby boards of elected laymen
oversaw the "temporal affairs" of their parishes, matters that included
everything from when and how a new roof might be placed on a chapel to
the hiring of priests and the payment of their salaries.[^14] 

In short, why did "papists" become "patriots"? This is a question that I
have tried to answer in my own research.[^15] I believe that the answer
has a long history, one that began in England in the early seventeenth
century, when being English and Catholic meant rebelling against both
the Church and the State to some degree, and gained momentum during the
nine decades preceding the American Revolution, when Maryland's
Catholics lost a religious toleration that had been uniquely theirs in
the English-speaking world and were forced to maintain their faith in an
environment that was neither welcoming nor supportive.

Throughout the so-called "Penal Period" in Maryland's history, which ran
from 1692 to 1776, the colony's General Assembly took up numerous pieces
of legislation that were designed to restrict the civil, military,
educational, economic, religious, and even parental rights and behavior
of Maryland's Catholics. Even when these bills were not actually turned
into laws---and they were, frequently, turned into laws---the
discussions and debates that the bills engendered made it decidedly
inconvenient, at times even onerous to be Catholic in Maryland. But it
had not always been this way. The colony had been founded in 1634 by a
Catholic nobleman, and for the first fifty-five years of Maryland's
existence, Catholics had worshipped freely along the
Chesapeake---something they had not been able to do in England. At
times, they had even dominated the Upper House of the Assembly, thanks
to the unabashed and indelicate nepotism of the colony's third
proprietor, Charles Calvert.

The age of Catholic toleration in Maryland came to an end when the
Glorious Revolution in England sparked a similar revolution in Maryland,
firmly establishing that to be "English" was to be "Protestant" and
forcing the Calvert family to convert to Anglicanism in order to retain
the charter to Maryland. For the next eighty-four years, Catholics in
the Calvert family's colony would be politically marginalized. They
subsequently fashioned a version of Catholicism for themselves that
reflected both the adverse political circumstances under which they
lived and the New World contingencies with which they were forced to
grapple on a daily basis.

They also constructed a collective "memory" of what life had been like
in Maryland during the age when all varieties of Christianity had been
tolerated. The memory was a bit selective. It tended to avoid the
reality of religious favoritism in Charles Calvert's government, and it
also spoke of toleration in the seventeenth century as if it were a
fact, simply because it was a law. The reality was that many of
Maryland's Protestants rebelled against the rule of their Catholic
proprietor, even before the Calvert family was forced to convert. The
memory was not meant to be completely factual, however. It was meant to
sustain the Catholic community during a time when being Catholic had
become inconvenient. The memory preserved Catholic identity, in spite of
the inconveniences that came with it, by linking that identity to
liberty and tradition and, in so doing, ennobling it. The memory also,
implicitly, identified England as a source of corruption. Maryland's
"constitution" (to use the word that Catholics started using as early as
1718) had been a perfect guarantor of the rights of Englishmen. Those
rights, according to one priest who served in Maryland from 1712 to
1724, included "Liberty of Conscience," which was the "reason behind the
peopling of this province" and the "perpetual and inherent birthright of
each Marylandian."[^16] Had the colony not been tied to England, the
priest implied, the religious bigotry that had infected England's
constitution in 1689---and which threatened the rights of Englishmen in
Maryland---never would have infected the constitution of Maryland.

Little wonder, then, that when the break with England finally came in
1776, Catholics enthusiastically embraced it. They had been evolving
into Americans for decades by that point. The independence movement's
emphasis on liberty and freedom, and its insistence on the separate
nature of the colonies' constitutions and on the corrupting influence of
England resonated with a population that had experienced first-hand the
negative consequences of being tied politically to England. In many
respects, Maryland's Catholics were the colonists most prepared in the
1770s to accept the ideological, cultural, and psychological
implications of a break with England.

## Masterless Mistresses

There were no convents in British colonial America. At least thirty-one
women left the colony of Maryland between 1747 and 1756 to join convents
in continental Europe. But unlike the men who traveled to Europe
throughout the eighteenth century and returned to the Calvert family's
proprietary holding as Jesuit priests, none of the women who left
Maryland to join the Church leadership during the colonial period
returned to the New World until after the colonies had won their
independence in 1783.

Mother Bernardina Teresa Xavier of St. Joseph returned to her native
Charles County in 1790, having left her parents thirty-six years earlier
so that she could sail to Belgium as Ann Matthews and enter the
contemplative order of the Discalced Carmelites. Together with her two
nieces, who were also Maryland-born Carmelite nuns, and Charles Neale, a
priest from Port Tobacco whose older brother, Leonard, would one day
become the second Archbishop of Baltimore, Mother Bernardina founded the
first convent in the United States, the Mount Carmel Monastery in
Charles County, Maryland.[^17]

In 1831, Archbishop James Whitefield moved the Carmelite convent to the
city of Baltimore. Today, fifteen sisters (and one border collie) serve
the Catholic community in Maryland from that post.[^18] In an ultimately
obvious, though initially confounding twist, however, the first convent
in the United States is not the *oldest*  convent in the United States.
That title belongs to the Ursuline Convent of New Orleans, which was
founded in 1727, three-quarters of a century before Louisiana finally
secured its permanent identity as part of the United States.

Historian Emily Clark has painstakingly unearthed the joys, sorrows,
trials, and accomplishments of the sixty-nine French, Cuban, and Creole
women who belonged to the Ursuline Convent from its founding in the age
of French colonial expansion, through its existence in a Spanish New
World colony, and into its status as an early institutional leader of
the Catholic Church in the new United States.[^19] The story that
emerges from Clark's work is a decidedly "American" one, in that the
women who operated the convent learned early on that life in the New
World was different from life in the Old, and that many of the
traditional hierarchies and values that had governed their lives in
Europe could not be easily transplanted to North America. This does not
mean that the sisters did not try---and Clark makes it very clear that
within the convent's walls, the Ursuline nuns did order their universe
"along rigidly conservative lines" that maintained the Old World
distinction between elite "choir nuns" and working-class "converse" nuns
and, in so doing, "cultivat\[ed\] and preserve\[ed\] in a colonial setting a
replica of the hierarchical European social order to which elites were
attached."[^20] 

But Clark also makes it clear that even as they replicated this European
social order, the Ursuline nuns were forced to grapple with realities
that were uncommon, unnecessary, or often even non-existent in Europe.
The experience of reconciling these realities with their identities as
women, nuns, and especially Ursulines turned the people who operated the
convent in New Orleans into women, nuns, and Ursulines who were
different from---that is, more independent and worldly than---their
counterparts in Europe.

Race was one of the realities that Ursulines of the New World grappled
with. It was an unavoidable consequence of the geographic and economic
setting in which the sisters found themselves. Indians were mere
novelties in France, and people of African descent, while not unheard of
in Europe, were far more plentiful in eighteenth-century Louisiana,
where they also tended to be enslaved. Clark tells us that the Ursulines
chose to order their convent in a way that respected the agenda of
universal female education that had been laid out for them by their
order's founder and by the original superior of their convent. In a city
where the complexion of the Catholic Church grew darker and darker as
the century progressed (a development that the Ursulines played no small
role in affecting), this meant that within the convent's walls, white
students were increasingly expected to share classrooms and bedrooms
with black and mixed-race students, irrespective of the laws and social
mores that governed racial relations on the streets of New Orleans.

This dogged determination to remain true to the obligations that had
been set for them in the Old World, together with their status as
educated, permanently unmarried female members of colonial society,
forced the sisters to assume assertive and at times even antagonistic
postures toward certain civil and religious leaders in Louisiana,
especially during the period from 1767 to 1803, when the colony was
under Spanish rule. The Spanish, Clark tells us, "practiced an
established choreography of racial demarcation at odds with the slippery
categories that evolved in the French colonial church and convent."
During the Spanish period in Louisiana's history, "an elaborate
repertoire of labels was introduced to classify people of color." The
French were "certainly not indifferent to skin color," and the Ursulines
who ran the convent in New Orleans never actually challenged the
institution of slavery, in spite of the fact that they clearly
recognized the wretched nature of the slave condition. But the nuns did
exhibit a substantial degree of color-blindness when it came to the
issue of the Sacraments, recognizing inter-racial marriages that
violated the Spanish concept of *limpieza de sangre*, i.e., "purity of
blood," and insisting that marriages involving slaves be consecrated in
the Church, even as civil authorities were reluctant recognize such
marriages.[^21]

Sometimes, this racial ecumenism created conflict within the convent
itself, as Spanish creole nuns who were "accustomed to a cultural
vocabulary of racial purity" joined the convent and struggled with the
fluid nature of race relations within. Often, however, the conflict that
the Ursulines created was between themselves and the civil and clerical
authorities who represented the Spanish government in the New World.
Beginning in the 1770s, these authorities "enacted a series of measures
that signaled diminishing formal toleration for blurred and imprecise
social and racial demarcations." And yet, behind the convent's walls,
the Ursulines continued to teach and minister to "all of the city's
female population, even as this activity grew notably more incongruous
with the interests of the class and race to which they belonged."[^22] 

In asserting themselves in this way---as well as in other ways that
involved the convent's finances and the non-educational services the
sisters would supply (or were expected to supply) to the city---the
Ursuline nuns of New Orleans morphed into New World Catholics who
challenged not just the gender norms that dominated their church in the
Old World, but also---as Clark points out in her epilogue---the gender
norms that would dominate the early years of the American republic. The
nuns were "masterless mistresses" whose experiences of "independence"
were markedly different from those of both the nuns who belonged to the
same order in Europe and the Protestant women who made up the bulk of
the population in the country the New Orleans sisters would ultimately
join. "These elements," Clark tells us, "mark the Ursulines as
American."[^23] 

## Frontier Fathers

In France, revolutionary sensibilities took on a tone that was very
different from the tone that characterized the independence movement in
the British colonies. This tone, of course, was overtly
anti-aristocratic. But it was also anti-clerical, and during the ten
months that constituted the so-called "Reign of Terror" in 1793 and
1794, twenty-seven Ursuline nuns, ranging in age from thirty-one to
seventy, were beheaded by revolutionary zealots who saw the Catholic
Church as antithetical to the republican society the reformers claimed
to be establishing.[^24]

The Ursulines were among 126 clerical women who were put to death during
the Reign of Terror. Ten times as many priests and monks were also
killed. Between 1789 and 1800, revolutionaries forced nearly 30,000
priests to leave France or else face execution. Most of the priests who
fled chose to remain in Europe, but twenty-three of them elected to
immigrate to the United States, which was just a few years old at the
time. The number seems small, until one considers that in the 1790s,
there were just thirty priests living in the entire United States. Seen
in this light, it becomes perfectly understandable why---in the words of
historian Michael Pasquier---"French missionary priests did wield
considerable influence in the development of an ecclesiastical presence
in the United States, and especially in Maryland, Kentucky, Texas, and
Louisiana." [^25]

Many scholars have noted the role that the anti-clericalism of the
French Revolution played in the spread of an "ultramontane" approach to
Catholicism.[^26] Ultramontanism was a philosophy of worship that the
Vatican began cultivating in the early nineteenth century, in response
to the "de-Christianization" of France. It stressed the fallen nature of
humanity and the idea that people and their governments could overcome
the reality of sin only through the wisdom and guidance of the Church.
Rome was the font of all authority for ultramontane Catholics, be it
civil or religious, and French priests who knew what could happen when
civil authorities refused to recognize the authority of the Church
helped to cultivate a strain of conservative Catholicism that historian
Luca Codignola has insisted soon came to dominate the faith in "the new
North Atlantic World."[^27]

While Codignola is undoubtedly correct that refugee French priests were
vital to the spread of ultramontanism---even in the United States---I
think his analysis of ultramontanism's growth in the North Atlantic
World is a little too eager to ignore the strong strains of
republicanism that were present in American Catholicism during the first
few decades of America's existence as an independent nation. In so
doing, Codignola has failed to do justice to the role that Irish
immigration played in the growth of ultramontanism in American
Catholicism. Ultramontanism found fertile ground in Ireland, where the
authority of the local, civil officials had been rendered understandably
suspect by centuries of religious persecution. Looking "over the
mountain" (i.e., the Alps) to Rome was a way for Ireland's Catholics to
delegitimize English authority, even as they were forced to defer to it.
When they came to the United States, Ireland's Catholics brought their
Rome-centered Catholicism with them.[^28]

Understanding that the dominance of French priests on the ecclesiastical
landscape in early America did not automatically mean that American
Catholicism became ultramontane, Pasquier focuses his attention on the
role that "local circumstances, individual personalities, and
educational formation played in the practice of the priesthood in
American missions."[^29] Pasquier's analysis actually lies beyond the
"colonial" parameters of this roundtable; his exiled French priests
arrived in the United States, and although some eventually made their
way to Louisiana, the people they served were technically no longer
European colonists by that point. They were Americans.

I include a brief discussion of Pasquier's work in this roundtable,
however, in part because his work serves as a corrective to Codignola's
effort to label North Atlantic Catholicism as definitively
"conservative," and also because I think his exploration of the
"frontier fathers" who guided the ecclesiastical development of early
American Catholicism could serve as a model for scholars who are working
on the history of Catholicism in Spanish colonial America---parts of
which, of course, ultimately became the American South.

Pasquier consciously avoids the theme of "Americanization" in his
analysis, because the priests he focuses on were decidedly *not*
Americanizers; indeed, many of the priests who came to the United
States from France---or who were trained in the United States by priests
who had fled from France---were leaders in the successful movement to
banish lay trusteeism from the American Catholic experience. John
Carroll, the first bishop in the United States, had been a reluctant,
but definitive supporter of lay trusteeism as a way of managing the
Church's affairs during the years when there were very few priests in
the United States.[^30] Following Carroll's death in 1815, however,
American bishops began working to dismantle lay trusteeism because they
saw in it the taint of American Protestantism.[^31]

While he eschews the Americanization theme, Pasquier does understand
that the priests who came to America from France were irrevocably and
unavoidably changed by the experience. "Missionary priests struggled to
reconcile what they were taught in French seminaries and read in
devotional literature with what they experienced on the frontier,"
Pasquier tells us. As French priests moved from Baltimore into the
territory that lay west of the Appalachian Mountains---Kentucky, the
Mississippi territory, Louisiana, Missouri, even Texas---they
experienced poverty, disease, isolation, non-Catholics, and irreverent
Catholics. Very few of them abandoned their vocations as they
encountered these challenges. But some did "slip," so to speak, taking
mistresses and drinking too much alcohol, and even those who maintained
their celibacy and sobriety "changed the way they practiced the
priesthood as they encountered a diversity of people, ideas,
institutions, and places."[^32]

In America, the French priests became more devotional, as living along
the frontier tested their faith. In the privacy of their own hearts,
they often questioned their vocation and the appropriateness of their
mission to North America. In an effort to triumph over their spiritual
crises---and to hide them from the men and women they were bound to
serve---the priests focused upon the role that Christ's suffering on the
cross played in the salvation of humanity. It was not enough that Christ
had died for humanity's sins; he had *suffered*  for them, just as the
fathers on the frontier were suffering. And the saints had suffered,
too. "French missionary priests looked to the saints for ways to
interpret suffering as something to be welcomed," Pasquier explains.
"They attempted to incorporate Catholic symbols like crucifixes,
statues, and relics into the visional and material fabric of the
American frontier."[^33]

Europe, too, eventually saw the growth of a highly devotional approach
to Catholicism.[^34] But it happened a little sooner along the frontier
in the new United States. Also, the development of Catholic
devotionalism in the United States was not, at least initially, a
response to modernity and/or secularism, as it was in Europe. Rather,
the first strains of Catholic devotional piety were a response to the
spiritual challenges that French priests experienced in the wilds of the
frontier.[^35]

"The decision to 'Americanize' the Church ... was not always made in
official councils or pastoral letters or theological treatises or papal
announcements," Pasquier writes (in his one overt acknowledgment of the
contribution he is making to the conversation about Catholic
Americanization). "Priests rarely decide to transform the Church in
obviously calculative ways.... Much of the Church changes when the
priests change, and priests change because of the places they go and the
people they meet."[^36]

I think it could only be a good thing if the scholars who focus on the
development of Catholicism in Spanish colonial America could take this
realization with them into the archives. Some have---but their work has
focused primarily on Mexico, and not on the territories that eventually
joined the slave-holding American South. Jodi Bilnikoff and Alan Greer
have put together a marvelous volume that considers the ways in which
the Catholic Church in Mexico accommodated itself to the contingencies
of the New World. Devotion to St. Anne, for instance, flourished in
Mexico, even though the Vatican actively sought to suppress this
devotion as part of its effort to promote a patriarchal view of the Holy
Family. The priests in Mexico allowed---and even encouraged---devotion
to St. Anne because their parishioners demanded it, and according to
Charlene Villase√±or Black, this demand was a consequence of the
"preference for the extended matriarchal family" that characterized
"indigenous family structures."[^37]        

To what extent did this kind of accommodation take place in the Spanish
colonial territory that eventually became Texas, Arkansas, Oklahoma, and
Florida? Future scholars, I hope, will tell us.

## American Slavery, American Freedom, American Catholicism

The Ursulines who immigrated to New Orleans in 1727 and the priests who
fled to Baltimore in the 1790s all joined a culture that had firmly
embraced race-based slavery -- and Clark insists "it was beyond their
power... to delay or oppose" the development of this economic and
cultural institution.[^38] The English Catholics who migrated to
Maryland in the 1630s and 1640s, however, did not *join*  a culture that
had accepted slavery; they helped to create that culture. The first
legal recognition of race-based slavery in British colonial America,
after all, was a law passed in Maryland in 1664, requiring all Africans
brought into the colony as servants to serve "durante vita," i.e. for
the duration of their lives.[^39] An interrogation of the relationship
between colonial Maryland's Catholics and the institution of slavery,
therefore, offers scholars a unique opportunity to explore the contours
of the Catholic relationship with a fundamental---possibly even
foundational---component of American cultural identity.

Many scholars have already explored the Catholic Church's support for
slavery in the United States. Most have focused on the religious
intolerance of the abolitionist movement's leaders, concluding that the
Church's stance on slavery was fueled as much (if not more) by the
virulent anti-Catholicism of firebrands like William Lloyd Garrison and
Lyman Beecher as it was by a theological commitment to the enslavement
of an entire race of people. A few scholars have also ventured into the
realm of doctrine, noting that Church fathers such as Augustine and
Aquinas taught that slavery brought order to a fallen world in which
some people were born without an ability to govern
themselves.[^40]        

My own research, however, has suggested that slavery may have played a
role in the creation of a distinctly "American" form of Roman Catholic
identity---one that was comfortable with the republicanism and
individualism that were at the heart of what it meant to be an American
at the time of the Founding. The British journalist Harriet Martineau
observed the republican leanings of American Catholics in the early
1830s and concluded that in America, Catholicism had been "modified by
the spirit of the times." Historians since then have agreed with her,
concluding that pre-immigrant Catholics were "influenced by broader
American notions of authority." They were "accustomed to the republican
idea that ordinary people such as themselves were the source of power in
civil society." They assumed, then, that that meant they were the source
of at least some power within the Catholic Church, as well.[^41]

But American notions of authority at the time of the Founding were not
simply about the idea that "ordinary people" were the "source of power
in civil society." As Edmund Morgan pointed out nearly forty years ago,
"American slavery," with its racially based, inherited qualities, was
the "flying buttress" to "American freedom." The reason the "most ardent
American republicans \[in the 1770s\] were Virginians," Morgan wrote, was
that lawmakers in colonial Virginia had taken the poorest residents and
"isolated \[them\] by race and removed \[them\] from the political
equation."[^42]

In the eighteenth century, the Chesapeake Bay region was home to the
second-largest concentration of slave labor in the burgeoning British
empire. In 1790, when the first formal census of Maryland's population
was taken by the United States government, roughly a third of the
state's entire population was enslaved. Between 1743 and 1759, the
average number of slaves owned by an elite planter in Maryland was
22---but the average number of slaves owned by a Catholic, "elite" or
clerical, during this same time period was 31. Indeed, Catholics such as
Charles Carroll of Annapolis and Henry Darnell were some of the largest
slaveholders in the entire colony.[^43] 

The American identity that Maryland's Catholics embraced in the 1770s
and 1780s, republican though it was, was not based on a foundation of
radical individualism (or more overtly, anti-Catholicism) the way it was
for many Protestants, especially in the North. Catholic
republicanism---like the republicanism identified by Morgan, Eugene
Genovese, and Lacy Ford---was a racialized republicanism built on a
foundation of ordered relationships that were defined and defended by
the institution of race-based slavery.[^44] Republican society for
southerners and colonial and early national Catholics alike was not one
in which freedom and individualism ran amok, as they did in the
industrializing North soon after the Revolution was over. Rather, it was
one in which communal obligations were honored and relationships were
seen to be ordered in such a way as to allow for the basic human needs
of all individuals to be met, while at the same time giving a growing
number of men---*white* men---the freedom to cultivate their individual
talents.

Slavery, in other words, made republicanism and individual freedom
"safe" for eighteenth- and early-nineteenth-century Catholics to embrace
by ensuring that the bonds of hierarchy and reciprocal obligation that
were so important to the Catholic understanding of human relations
remained intact. This may explain why few, if any Catholics manumitted
their slaves in the years that immediately followed the American
Revolution. From 1783 to 1790, between 7,000 and 10,000 slaves in
Maryland were freed by their masters---a phenomenal spike in
manumissions that scholars have pointed to as a sign that some
slaveholding members of America's founding generation recognized that
slavery could not be easily reconciled with the ideology of the American
Revolution. Yet, extensive genealogical surveys of the surviving
manumission records from the period reveal that Catholics in Maryland
did not start manumitting their slaves until at least the second decade
of the nineteenth century---a time when scholars believe manumissions
may have been prompted by other factors, such as the declining
profitability of slavery in the Upper South.[^45]

None of this information requires that Catholics be condemned as a group
for failing to manumit their slaves in the immediate wake of the
American Revolution. The fact is that most Methodists, Anglicans, and
Calvinists did not free their slaves during this period, either. But
some did. And the fact that Catholics did not suggests that they may not
have seen the hierarchical and authoritarian reality of slavery as
inconsistent with the republican principles they embraced when, in the
wake of the Revolution, they officially became Americans.

The study of Catholicism in the colonial South---particularly the study
of lay Catholic experiences during this period---will, I fear, continue
to be plagued by an exaggerated version of a perennial problem in the
field of colonial American history: the scarcity of sources.
Nevertheless, the scholarship that has come out in the last decade or so
suggests that the contributions early Catholics made *as people*,
rather than as members of an institution, to the cultivation of American
and even southern identity in the eighteenth century can be uncovered
with some creative massaging of the surviving sources, a bit of
genealogical research (so as to find the Catholics in the sources that
are not specifically church-related), and a whole lot of dedication.

[^1]: Paul E. Hoffman, *A New Andalucia and a Way to the Orient: The
  American Southeast During the Sixteenth Century* (Baton Rouge:
  Louisiana State University Press, 2004), 205--231; Stephen Adams,
  *The Best and Worst Country in the World: Perspectives on the Early
  Virginia Landscape* (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press,
  2001), 61; and Jon F. Sensbach, "Religion and the Early South in an
  Age of Atlantic Empire," *Journal of Southern History*  LXXII, no. 3
  (2007), 632.

[^2]:  J.F. Regis Canevin, "Loss and Gain in the Catholic Church in the
United States, 1800--1916," *Catholic Historical Review* (January
1917), 380--81; Jay Dolan, *In Search of an American Catholicism: A
History of Religion and Culture in Tension*  (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2001), 58; and Michael Pasquier, *Fathers on the
Frontier: French Missionaries and the Roman Catholic Priesthood in
the United States, 1789--1870*  (New York: Oxford University Press,
2010), 58.

[^3]:  Christine Leigh Heyrman, *Southern Cross: The Origins of the
Bible Belt*  (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1998).

[^4]:  Dolan, *American Catholicism*, 58; and Benjamin J. Blied,
*Catholics and the Civil War*  (Milwaukee: n.p., 1945), 53.

[^5]:  For more on ultramontanism, and particularly its expression
within the immigrant communities that came to the United States, see
Patricia Byrne, "American Ultramontanism," *Theological Studies*  56
(1995): 301--338; David J. O'Brien, *Isaac Hecker: An American
Catholic*  (Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 1993), 242--320; John T.
McGreevy, *Catholicism and American Freedom*  (New York: W. W.
Norton, 2003), 12--13, 28--29; and Dolan, *In Search of an American
Catholicism*, 44--49.

[^6]:  Garry Wills, *Bare, Ruined Choirs: Doubt, Prophecy, and Radical
Religion*  (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1971), 15. For more on this
Catholic parochialism, see Mark Massa, *Catholics and American
Culture: Fulton Sheen, Dorothy Day, and the Notre Dame Football
Team*  (New York: Crossroad, 2001), 1--20; and Patricia K. Good,
"Irish Adjustment to American Society: Integration or Separation? A
Portrait of an Irish Catholic Parish: 1863--1886," *Records of the
American Catholic Historical Society of Philadelphia*  (1975):
7--23.

[^7]:  See, for example, James O'Toole, *The Faithful: A History of
Catholics in America*  (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2008);
Paula M. Kane, *Separatism and Subculture: Boston Catholicism,
1900--1920*  (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1994); Ann Taves, *The*  *Household of Faith: Roman Catholic
Devotions in Mid-Nineteenth-Century America*  (Notre Dame:
University of Notre Dame Press, 1986); and Robert Orsi*, The Madonna
of 115th Street: Faith and Community in Italian Harlem, 1880--1950*
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985).

[^8]:  The interest in American Catholicism among non-Catholic scholars
is not completely new, of course. Rueben Gold Thwaites, who was
raised as a Congregationalist, broke that ground more than a century
ago, with his 73-volume English translation of the *Jesuit
Relations* . In the 1980s, Martin Marty made significant
contributions to the field, in spite of his ardent Lutheranism.
Nevertheless, the study of American Catholicism has consistently
been dominated by Catholics---many acting as apologists, some
not---and that reality is changing to some degree. Emily Clark's
book on the Ursuline sisters of New Orleans, Kevin Schultz's book on
Catholic contributions to the American climate of religious
pluralism, Tracy Neal Leavelle's book on relations between the
Jesuits and the Illinois and Ottawa Indians, and Amy Koehlinger's
book on the involvement of nuns in the civil rights movement all
stand as recent examples of the great work that has been done on
American Catholic history by non-Catholics. See Reuben Gold
Thwaites, ed., *The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents: Travels
and Explorations of the Jesuit Missionaries in New France,
1610--1791*  (Cleveland: Burrows Bros., 1896--1901), 73 vols.;
Martin F. Marty, *An Invitation to American Catholic History*
(Chicago: Thomas More, 1986); Emily Clark, *Masterless Mistresses:
The New Orleans Ursulines and the Development of a New World
Society, 1727--1834*  (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 2007); Kevin M. Schultz, *Tri-Faith America: How Catholics
and Jews Held Post-War America to its Protestant Promise*  (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2011); Tracy Neal Leavelle, *The
Catholic Calumet: Catholic Conversions in French and Indian North
America*  (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2011);
and Amy Koehlinger, *The New Nuns: Racial Justice and Religious
Reform in the 1960s*  (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2007).

[^9]:  Sensbach, "Religion and the Early South in an Age of Atlantic
Empire," 634.

[^10]:  Joseph P. Chinnici, "Freedom's Freedom: A Conversation with John
McGreevy," *U.S. Catholic Historian*  21, no. 4 (2003): 93--99; Luca
Codignola, "Roman Catholic Conservatism in a New North Atlantic
World, 1760--1829," *William and Mary Quarterly*  64, no. 4 (2007):
717--756; Peter D'Agostino, *Rome in America: Transnational Catholic
Ideology from the Risorgimento to Fascism*  (Chapel Hill: University
of North Carolina Press, 2004), 5, 315; and Pasquier, *Fathers on
the Frontier*, 11.

[^11]:  Arthur O'Leary, "Address to the Common People of the Roman
Catholic Religion," (1779), in O'Leary, *The Life and Writings of
the Rev. Arthur O'Leary*, ed. Michael Bernard Buckley (Dublin:
James Duffy, 1868), 103; and William Henry Drayton, "Charge of
William Henry Drayton," in *American Archives, Fourth Series*,
Peter Force, ed. (Washington, DC, 1837) 6:959.

[^12]:  Maura Jane Farrelly, "American Slavery, American Freedom,
American Catholicism," *Early American*  *Studies*  10 (2012), n.
24.

[^13]:  Robert M. Calhoon, "Loyalism and Neutrality," in Jack P. Greene
and J. R. Pole, eds., *A Companion to the American Revolution*
(Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2000), 235; William Hand Brown et al.,
eds., *Archives of Maryland* (Baltimore: Maryland Historical
Society, 1883--), 9:315, 25:258--59; M. Christopher Newton,
*Maryland Loyalists in the American Revolution*  (Centreville, MD:
Tidewater, 1996); Ronald Hoffman, *A Spirit of Dissension:
Economics, Politics,*  *and the Revolution in Maryland* (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1973), 80--82, 98--100; and David
Curtis Skaggs, "Maryland's Impulse toward Social Revolution,
1750--1776," *Journal of American History* 54 (1968): 771--86.

[^14]:  Patrick Carey, *People,*  *Priests, and Prelates: Ecclesiastical
Democracy and the Tensions of Trusteeism*  (Notre Dame: University
of Notre Dame Press, 1987), 156; O'Toole, *The Faithful*, 59. Kevin
Roberts, the founder of Catholic Families for America, and Timothy
Dolan, the current Archbishop of New York, have both written that
the age of lay trusteeism in the American church was a time of
"rebellion" and "heresy." See Kevin Roberts, "Modern Lessons from
America's First Bishop," *National Catholic Register,* October 2,
2009; and Timothy M. Dolan, "Right from the Start: John Carroll, Our
First Bishop," lecture lecture given at the Archdiocese of Baltimore
Bicentennial Celebration, Baltimore, April 22, 2008, available at
*Catholic Culture,*
http://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?id\_8269&CFID\_60966295&

[^15]:  Maura Jane Farrelly, *Papist Patriots: The Making of an American
Catholic Identity*  (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012).

[^16]:  Peter Atwood, "Liberty and Property, or the Beauty of Maryland
Displayed," rpt., *United States Catholic Historical Magazine*
3(1889--90): 252, 242.

[^17]:  Fr. George Hunter to John Tichbourn, no date (but between 1747
and 1756), "Hunter Letterbook," Maryland Province Archives (MPA),
Box 2, Fol. 10, Special Collections, Georgetown University (SCGU);
"Notes and Comments," *Catholic Historical Review*  (Washington, DC,
1917), 2:238--239; and Charles Warren Currier, *Carmel in America: A
Centennial History of the Discalced Carmelites in the United States*
(Baltimore: John Murphy, 1890), 56--59, 70--86.

[^18]:  Currier, *Carmel in America*, 191; "The Restorers of Mount
Carmel in Maryland, Inc.,"
[http://www.restorersmtcarmelmd.org/Nuns\_of\_Mt\_Carmel.html][] (accessed
9 July 2012).

[^19]:  From the convent's founding until the sale of Louisiana to the
Jefferson administration in 1803, sixty-nine women served in the
Ursuline Convent. Clark's book, however, does briefly consider the
experiences of additional nuns who were serving in the convent as
late as 1834.

[^20]: Clark, *Masterless Mistresses*, 150, 156.

[^21]:  Ibid., 3, 100--104, 132--133.

[^22]:  Ibid., 134, 139.

[^23]:  Ibid., 264, 4.

[^24]:  Jacques Guilhaumou and Martine Lapied, "Women's Political Action
During the French Revolution," in *Political and Historical
Encyclopedia of Women*, ed. Christine Faure, (New York: Routledge,
2003), 124.

[^25]:  Ibid.; Timothy Tackett and Claude Langlois, "Ecclesiastical
Structures and Clerical Geography on the Eve of the French
Revolution," *French Historical Studies*  11 (1980): 357; and
Pasquier, *Fathers on the Frontier*, 27, 15.

[^26]:  See, for example, Peter N. Stearns, *Priest and Revolutionary:
Lamennais and the Dilemma of French Catholicism* (New York: Harper
and Row, 1967), 46--49; Norman Ravitch, "Liberalism, Catholicism,
and the Abb√© Gr√©goire, *Church History*  36 (1967): 437; J. Francis
Stafford, "'Train Up to Virtue': A Reflection on the Maryland
Tradition," *U.S. Catholic Historian*  8 (1989): 61; and Obed
Heilbronner, "The Age of Catholic Revival," in *A Companion to
Nineteenth-Century Europe, 1789--1914*, ed. Stefan Berger
(Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2006), 236--247.

[^27]:  Codignola, "Roman Catholic Conservatism in a New North Atlantic
World." Peter D'Agostino also discusses the role that exiled French
priests played in the spread of ultramontanism in *Rome in America.*

[^28]:  Carey, *People*, *Priests, and Prelates* ; Emmet Larkin, "The
Devotional Revolution in Ireland," *American Historical Review* 77
(1972): 625--652; Michael P. Carroll, *American Catholics in the
Protestant Imagination*  (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
2007), 5--6, 46--48; and Patricia Byrne, "American Ultramontanism,"
*Theological Studies* 56 (1995): 301--338.

[^29]:  Pasquier, *Fathers on the Frontier*, 28.

[^30]:  John Carroll, "John Carroll's Letter on Trusteeism," (1786), in
Mark Massa and Catherine Osborne, eds., *American Catholic History:
A Documentary Reader*  (New York: New York University Press, 2008),
32; Rodger van Allen, "Lay Distrusteeism," *Commonweal*, 12
September 12 2008. Archbishop Timothy Dolan of New York has argued
that Carroll was an opponent of lay trusteeism, but Carroll's letter
to the trustees of St. Peter's Church in New York City makes it
clear that he saw lay trusteeism as an important means by which the
Catholic Church in early America might be sustained. See Dolan's
lecture, "Right from the Start: John Carroll, Our First Bishop."

[^31]:  Thomas J. Shelley, "When Catholics Were Congregationalists,"
*Commonweal*, 12 September 2003, 29; Dale B. Light, *Rome and the
New Republic: Conflict and Community in Philadelphia Catholicism
between the Revolution and the Civil War*  (Notre Dame, IN:
University of Notre Dame Press, 1996), 241; Carey, *Priests, People,
and Prelates*, 214.

[^32]:  Pasquier, *Fathers on the Frontier*, 59, 19.

[^33]:  Ibid., 68, 65--66.

[^34]:  For more on the growth of Catholic devotionalism in
Europe---particularly English-speaking Europe---see Mary Heimann,
*Catholic Devotion in Victorian England*  (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1995); Bill McSweeney, *Roman Catholicism: The
Search for Relevance*  (New York: Palgrave, 1980); and Derek Holmes,
*The Triumph of the Holy See: A short History of the Papacy in the
Nineteenth Century*  (Shepherstown, WV: Burns and Oates, 1978).

[^35]:  In the latter half of the nineteenth century, the United States
did experience a wave of Catholic devotionalism that was cultivated
by the Church hierarchy as a way of shepherding Catholics to the
margins of their predominantly Protestant society and, in so doing,
preserving the unique features of the Catholic faith. This
manifestation of devotionalism was a deliberate reaction against the
move toward "Americanization" that Catholic converts like Isaac
Hecker and Orestes Brownson were pushing for, and in this sense, its
origins were very different from earlier varieties of Catholic
devotionalism along the frontier. See McGreevy, *Catholicism and
American Freedom*, 27--29; and Ann Taves, "Context and Meaning:
Roman Catholic Devotion to the Blessed Sacrament in
Mid-Nineteenth-Century America," *Church History*  54 (1985):
482--195.

[^36]:  Pasquier, *Fathers on the Frontier*, 21.

[^37]:  Charlene Villase√±or Black, "St. Anne Imagery and Maternal
Archetypes in Spain and Mexico," in *Colonial Saints: Discovering
the Holy in the Americas. 1500--1800* ed. Allan Greer and Jodi
Bilinkoff (New York: Routledge, 2003), 22.

[^38]:  Clark, *Masterless Mistresses*, 160. Tracy Fessenden has
suggested that Clark may be a little too willing to attribute a
"rhetoric of equality" to the Ursuline sisters, in light of their
unwillingness to challenge slavery. Tracy Fessenden, "untitled
review," review of *Masterless Mistresses: The New Orleans Ursulines
and the Development of a New World Society, 1727--1834*,* * by
Emily Clark, *Church History*  77 (2008): 1073--1078.

[^39]:  "An Act Concerning Negroes and Other Slaves" (1664), in *Civil
Rights and African Americans*, eds. Albert P. Blaustein and Robert
L. Zangrando, (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1968),
8--9.

[^40]:  Thomas J. Murphy, *Jesuit Slaveholding in Maryland, 1717--1838*
(New York: Routledge, 2001), 131, 147--149; James Hennesey,
*American Catholics: A History of the Roman Catholic Community in
the United States*  (New York: Oxford University Press, 1981),
143--157; and McGreevy, *Catholicism and American Freedom*, 43--67.

[^41]:  Harriet Martineau, *Society in America*  (London: Saunders and
Otley, 1837), 2:323; and O'Toole, *The Faithful*, 59.

[^42]:  Edmund Morgan, *American Slavery, American Freedom: The Ordeal
of Colonial Virginia*  (New York: W.W. Norton, 1975), 381, 380.

[^43]:  Barbara Jeanne Fields, *Slavery and Freedom in the Middle
Ground*  (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985), 13; Trevor Graeme
Burnard, *Creole Gentlemen: The Maryland Elite, 1691--1776*  (New
York, 2002), 5, 36, 38, 265; and Beatrize Bentancourt Hardy,
"Papists in a Protestant Age: The Catholic Gentry and Community in
Colonial Maryland, 1689--1776" (Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Maryland, 1993), 214, n. 68. Charles Carroll of Annapolis owned 386
slaves in 1773. Henry Darnell owned 100 in 1711.

[^44]:  Eugene D. Genovese, *The Slaveholders' Dilemma: Freedom and
Progress in Southern Political Thought, 1820--1860* (Columbia:
University of South Carolina Press, 1992), 6, 17; Lacy K. Ford,
*Origins of Southern Radicalism: The South Carolina Upcountry,
1800--1860* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988), 372--373. For
more on how Protestants used anti-Catholicism to define the
parameters of American freedom, see Elizabeth Fenton, *Religious
Liberties: Anti-Catholicism and Liberal Democracy in Nineteenth
Century U.S. Literature and Culture*  (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2011).

[^45]:  Farrelly, "American Slavery, American Freedom, American
Catholicism," 92--94, n43; and Ira Berlin, *Slaves Without Masters:
The Free Negro in the Antebellum South*  (New York: New Press 1992),
46, 29.

[http://www.restorersmtcarmelmd.org/Nuns\_of\_Mt\_Carmel.html]: http://www.restorersmtcarmelmd.org/Nuns_of_Mt_Carmel.html
