---
layout: article
title: "Protestantism in the Early South"
author-first: Travis
author-last: Glasson
author: Travis Glasson
author-note: "Travis Glasson is an associate professor of history at Temple
University."
vol: 14
year: 2012
---

For those who like their historiographical reflections served with a
dash of commemoration, this is an apt moment for considering recent
scholarship on Protestantism in the colonial South. In 1562---around 450
years ago and forty-five years before the founding of Jamestown---a
leading Huguenot nobleman and courtier, Gaspard de Coligny, sponsored a
voyage of exploration and settlement to what became the southern United
States. Looking to win France a larger share of the New World's wealth,
anxious to prove that Calvinists could be loyal and valuable servants to
the French Crown, and perhaps casting a predatory eye on the rich
treasure *flotas* that the Spanish sailed through the Bahama Channel,
Coligny sent two ships under the command of his fellow Huguenot Jean
Ribault to establish an outpost in the vast region the Spanish claimed
under the name *La Florida*. On May 1, 1562, Ribault's ships, manned
primarily by Protestant sailors and soldiers from northern France and
accompanied by a preacher of what Spanish sources generalized as "the
doctrine of Luther," made landfall in what is today north Florida, where
they met local Timucuan people and erected a stone pillar emblazoned
with the arms of the King of France.[^1] As readers will be aware if
they know this history, and might infer if they do not, French attempts
to colonize the southeast coast ultimately failed, but given the
religious sympathies of those involved, it seems likely that this
arrival marked the first act of Protestant worship in what would become
the United States. The anniversary has recently been marked by the city
of Jacksonville, the rededication of a monument to Ribault by the
National Park Service, and prayer services.

This public awareness suggests how understandings of the history of the
early South have changed in recent decades. As successive commentators
have recognized, a major impetus for the explicit study of *southern*
religion was the sense that the region was poorly accounted for within
long-dominant narratives that began national religious history with
Puritan New England and which characterized the colonial South as either
irreligious or irrelevant.[^2] These roots have meant that historians
interested in southern religion have often looked at the colonial period
primarily to explain the emergence of a distinctive religious culture in
the South. This typically has meant a focus on the second half of the
eighteenth century and on uncovering the origins of the particular
strains of evangelical Protestantism that seem so central to life in the
region from the antebellum period to today.[^3] Recent work, however,
addresses a wider range of themes. If the origins of evangelicalism
remain an important part of the religious history of the colonial South,
they are no longer the only things that matter.

As a whole, current scholarship tends to portray the early South as a
broad region characterized by persistent and complex patterns of
religious exchange and competition. This perspective, connected to wider
movements in the history of the colonial South toward borderlands,
continental, and hemispheric approaches, has extended the traditional
geographic and temporal boundaries of both "colonial America" and "the
South." This has seen scholars give more attention to lands south and
west of the Chesapeake and the Carolina Low Country and to periods
before and after the eighteenth century.[^4] It is revealing, to take
just one recent example, that Walter H. Conser, Jr.'s religious history
of the Cape Fear region begins not with the arrival of English settlers,
but with a consideration of Native American culture and religion and
Spanish Catholicism in the region.[^5] Intercultural contact and
exchange did not usually entail toleration; encounters in the South
between Europeans and between settlers and Native Americans were often
antagonistic and violent. As Karen Kupperman has observed,
"transatlantic colonization was undertaken in the atmosphere of
religious conflict that touched everything Europeans did."[^6]
Nevertheless, from early in its history the colonial South was a place
where people from an array of cultural and religious traditions lived
side by side.

The patterns established in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries long
endured across a region where the cultures of three European empires
(Spanish, French, and British) interacted with those of an array of
Native American, African, African-American, and other European peoples.
Randy Sparks, for example, has noted the late-seventeenth century
presence of Catholic French people, Native Americans, and Africans in
what became the state of Mississippi. To the consternation of local
priests, German Lutherans were recruited to settle in the region by the
French government, and they were followed by successive rounds of
Spanish, Irish, and English migration in the eighteenth century. To add
further complexity, control of land in the region changed hands between
Native Americans and settlers and between the French, Spanish, English
and American governments.[^7] Other contributors to this forum will
address the historiographies of southern Catholicism, Protestant
dissent, and Native American and African-American religion separately,
but it is clear that none of those religious traditions developed in
isolation. Dynamics like those that existed in Mississippi, the
exchanges that occurred across the South between enslaved Africans and
Europeans, and cooperation and competition within the British-controlled
South's Protestant community were all central to the long-term religious
history of the region.

Understandings of religion in the early South have also been shaped by
Atlantic history's development into a leading paradigm for
conceptualizing early American history more generally.[^8] As many
recent accounts stress, the migrations of Anglicans, Quakers, Huguenots,
Moravians, Presbyterians, and others to the South did not sever their
ties to Europe or their co-religionists elsewhere in the New World.
People, practices, and ideas continuously moved around well-connected
and enduring religious networks. Consequently it has become clear that
the religious lives of early southerners, like those of people elsewhere
in the Americas, were shaped by combinations of local and broader,
indeed transnational, forces. Borderlands, continental, and hemispheric
approaches have drawn attention further south and west than
long-dominant histories focused on colonial British America. Atlantic
history has pushed southern historians to look east and highlighted,
among other things, connections and similarities between the mainland
South and the Caribbean, which has enriched studies of the development
of black Protestantism, Quakerism, colonial Anglicanism, and other
subjects. In this way, Atlantic history has served as an antidote to the
excessive exceptionalism to which some southern religious history has
been prone.

Somewhat paradoxically, recent attention to subjects in southern
religious history other than evangelicalism may also be due to
influential work on evangelicalism itself. Christine Leigh Heyrman's
Bancroft Prize winning 1998 book *Southern Cross: The Beginnings of the
Bible Belt*, challenged any easy assumptions about the "naturalness" of
the emergence of southern evangelicalism by arguing that many
southerners were hostile to the movement and that it grew primarily in
the early national and antebellum periods, rather than the colonial era.
There was, Heyrman noted, nearly a century "between the 1740s, when
evangelicals started actively proselytizing in the South, and the middle
of the nineteenth century, when they may have won the attention if not
the allegiance, of a majority of southern whites."[^9] Protestant
evangelicalism's progress was even slower among African-Americans and
Native Americans. If, as Heyrman's work suggested, colonial southerners
were not simply evangelicals in waiting, then, what were they? For
several decades now, the once standard notion that they were just not
very religious has been challenged on a number of fronts.[^10] One
answer is that many of them were active adherents to the Church of
England, and recent years have seen the emergence of a richer and more
sophisticated literature on the Church of England in early America.

Much new research on Anglicanism, like older work, has focused on
Virginia and South Carolina, but wider Atlantic histories and other
sites have also received some attention. For the seventeenth century,
recent work has tended to stress the many things that early Anglican
settlers in Virginia had in common with their contemporaries in England,
New England and elsewhere in the Americas and this has meant an
increased awareness of the place of religion in the colony's
establishment. Douglas Bradburn has argued that militant
Protestant---that is anti-Spanish and anti-Catholic---thinking and
rhetoric played an important part in Virginia's founding.[^11] Like the
Spanish and early settlers in New England, the first Virginians saw the
Christianization of Native Americans as part of their mission. While
early hopes for the wholesale conversion of Virginia's Native Americans
did not result in mass conversions, Kupperman's recent history of
Jamestown has noted the "Virginia Company planned for a mission and
education program on a very grand scale, and people throughout England
supported it with their contributions."[^12] Both "borderlands" and
"Atlantic" perspectives have been useful here by situating the earliest
English attempts at colonization firmly within the context of a
religio-political rivalry in which the English both admired and
disparaged aspects of Spain's imperial growth. Eliga Gould, in
considering early Anglo-America as a "Spanish periphery," has noted that
"English spent their first fifteen years in Virginia trying to the turn
the colony into a sort of Protestant Mexico" and justified their own
treatment of Native Americans by reference to Spanish practices.[^13]

Likewise, scholars have deemphasized the contrast between Virginia and
New England by recognizing that seventeenth-century Puritanism, a
diverse movement that largely aimed to reform rather than destroy the
Church of England, was not a phenomenon confined to one American region.
April Lee Hatfield has noted that "Puritans formed an important part of
Virginia's population from the outset of its colonization" and had ties
to like-minded settlers in New England.[^14] Surveying the
circum-Atlantic religious scene in the 1640s, Carla Pestana has written
that "many colonists could be classed as 'puritan' in their religious
sensibilities" and this included not only those who had settled in New
England, but also residents of "Providence Island, the Somers Islands,
and Virginia."[^15] Against the backdrop of politico-religious civil war
in Britain, the 1640s and 1650s were tumultuous decades of
intra-Protestant wrangling in the royal colony of Virginia. Governor
William Berkeley expelled some prominent Puritan ministers in the 1640s
and subsequently supported the banishment of active Puritans. In 1652 a
Commonwealth-sponsored expedition cowed the colony's royalists, deposed
Berkeley, and installed the Puritan governor Richard Bennett.[^16] The
restoration of the House of Stuart in Britain, and of Berkeley to the
governorship, in 1660 secured the power of non-Puritan Anglicanism in
the colony. While for much of the seventeenth century the Church of
England was riven by internal controversy, the Glorious Revolution of
1688--89 cemented its Protestant episcopalianism and its legal
privileges, the latter of which were leavened by the official toleration
of Protestant dissent. From the 1690s, the Church of England would grow
across the South, bolstered by a trans-Atlantic network of assertive
Anglican activists including the members of two new voluntary
organizations, the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK) and
the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts (SPG).

The expansion of the colonial Church of England, which had a dramatic
impact on the South, was underpinned by a common belief in the
importance of communal worship and a widespread, albeit never universal,
acceptance of the principle of established religion. Although Anglican
southerners and Puritan New Englanders disagreed about the
ecclesiastical and theological details of any such establishment, they
shared considerable common ground on this point. Nor were these two
churches' adherents alone in this. In 1722, for example, the South
Carolina Presbyterian minister Archibald Stobo challenged the colony's
1706 law establishing the Church of England, but rather than a severing
of the church-state bond he envisioned a new joint establishment
encompassing both Presbyterianism and Anglicanism.[^17] Wider
perspectives on the early South underline this point: Catholics and
Anglicans alike wrestled with how to recreate state-supported European
Christianity in colonial societies. Supporters of the Church of England
always lived side by side with other Protestants in the English colonial
South, but as John K. Nelson has noted of eighteenth-century Virginia,
church and state were intimately connected and the parish was a unit
with responsibility over matters that would (only subsequently) come to
be seen as both "civil" and "religious."[^18]

Beyond recovering the salience of the church-state nexus, J. Nelson has
provided a sweeping reevaluation of the Church of England as a provider
of institutional religion by attempting "to reconstruct the everyday
context of colonial Virginia Anglicanism." He has shown that the
colony's Anglican clergy was more dedicated and less scandalous than
frequently claimed and that the widespread creation of chapels of ease,
which allowed for the existence of multiple congregations within large
parishes, made churchgoing easier and more common than previously
understood. Through the regular provision of opportunities for communal
worship and careful to attention to its legal privileges, the church
found ways to ensure that Virginians---men and women, rich and poor,
free and slaves---adhered to it. "Viewed from its parishes rather than
from Williamsburg or London," J. Nelson argues, "Virginia's Anglican
establishment appears firmly rooted and tightly woven into the daily and
commonplace experiences of eighteenth-century Virginians."[^19]

While many metropolitan supporters of the trans-Atlantic Anglican
revival aspired to fully recreate the ecclesiastical structure of the
church in England, in the colonies it remained an episcopal church
without local bishops. Historians continue to explore how this expanded
the power of the laity in church affairs and affected local religious
practice. Leslie Lindenauer, for example, has argued that in the
seventeenth century, the absence of a dominant Anglican ministry helped
open up space for women to exercise religious authority.[^20] Edward
Bond has argued that while books and deacons were used to assist
ordained ministers in conducting public worship in seventeenth-century
England, in contemporary Virginia they were even more important as the
colony struggled to attract sufficient numbers of episcopally-ordained
clergymen.[^21] As several scholars have recognized, the Book of Common
Prayer, used at home and in church, served as a loyalty-inspiring
touchstone of Anglican practice for southern men and women.[^22] The
influence of the laity did not mean, however, that popular commitment to
the church was weak. J. Nelson has emphasized the extent to which
"Virginia's parishes were firmly under lay control by leading gentry
families," but argued that this system produced in non-clergymen a
"remarkable sense of responsibility in ensuring that Anglican
worship---in form and substance---prevailed everywhere in the
colony."[^23]

The Church of England clearly appealed to southern elites, but it also
attracted the allegiance of more common people. Evidence for the depth
of lay support for Anglicanism has often been difficult for historians
to gauge. In Bond's characterization, "theirs was a low-key piety,
deeply felt and involving the 'whole individual'," but given to order
rather than to passion or ecstasy. Anglicans worked out their salvation
through a well-ordered journey to God."[^24] When lay Anglicans'
devotion left traces in the written record, it often did so through
churchmen's opposition to what they regarded as the excesses of other
denominations. William Stephens of Georgia, the secretary to the new
colony's Trustees, was a witness to some of the earliest moments in
evangelical history in the colony in the late 1730s and 1740s. Stephens
became increasingly concerned with the doctrines and style of George
Whitefield, who arrived in the colony as an Anglican clergyman in 1738,
but nevertheless recorded in his diary that "I should still think it my
duty to attend the publick Worship, whatever my Sentiments were of the
Preacher." It was his responses to the rising public influence of
Whitefield and his supporters, a recent biography notes, that revealed
"how much Stephens valued the principles and rituals of the Church of
England."[^25]

Given these evidentiary challenges, students of colonial Anglicanism,
like other scholars of American religion, have been drawn to
examinations of religious practice and material culture as ways to
better understand "lived religion." Nelson has noted that "the evidence
for Anglican spirituality and vital religious practice must largely be
inferred from everyday behaviors," and he and others have taken up this
challenge.[^26] Lauren Winner has argued that "Virginians were not
whited sepulchers just waiting for evangelical revivalists to 'awaken'
them to the importance of Christianity," and used analyses of objects
including baptismal bowls, needlework, cookbooks, and mourning rings to
illustrate the "quotidian religiosity of the eighteenth-century Virginia
gentry."[^27] Louis P. Nelson has focused on South Carolina Anglicans'
"material religion," including but not limited to church architecture,
to demonstrate the richness of lay religiosity in the colony and argue
that Anglican devotional life migrated from the household to "the space
of the church" over the course of the eighteenth century.[^28]
Evangelicals would subsequently decry the aridness and superficiality of
the established church, but in Christine Heyrman's apt summary, such
generalizations were countered by their own "recollections of the
devotional regimen of Anglican mothers, the stern rectitude of Anglican
fathers, and the common parental practices of teaching young Anglican
children to read with the Bible as their primer, drilling them in the
catechism, and stocking their households with books of sermons and other
religious treatises."[^29]

While rejecting the notion that the Church of England's *only* role was
the buttressing of social and political hierarchy, most recent work does
not deny that Anglican practice helped display and bolster the dominance
of the Anglophone South's slave-holding gentry. Rather it suggests, as
L. Nelson has argued, "that Anglicans were fully capable of embracing
the piety and prayer associated with the contemplative life *and* the
social and political hierarchies that were an everyday reality."[^30]
Getting the balance right in this regard can be challenging. The ongoing
rehabilitation of southern Anglicanism should not obscure the fact that
its entanglement with slavery---as much as lay piety and the power of
vestries---helped determine the particular features of the colonial
Church of England. Atlantic perspectives are particularly valuable in
this context because the fusion of legally-established Anglicanism with
plantation slavery was not just a feature of the mainland South. L.
Nelson, for example, has argued that Virginia and South Carolina should
be considered as part of a greater British Caribbean dominated by "a
cohesive planter class united by a shared political and social
identity." The emergence of this group---a process that stretched from
the 1670s to the 1710s---"was marked by a profound transformation in the
architecture of Anglican churches" across the region. The masonry and
cruciform churches constructed in this period not only represented
Anglican respect for "regularity" and order, they also marked "the
appropriation of the architecture of the church by this new elite,
hereditary landed class for the purposes of reifying their social and
political station."[^31]

Similarly, in a creative and compelling account of eighteenth-century
colonial Anglican ritual life, Nicholas Beasley has argued that the
"British slave societies" of Barbados, Jamaica, and South Carolina saw
"the gradual elaboration of a set of ritual habits in societies whose
most powerful members were committed to a fundamental racial and
cultural stasis."[^32] Beasley stresses the similarities among these
three colonies, arguing that in all of them participation in Anglican
rituals was more vigorous than many older accounts claimed. A commitment
to the regular practice of Anglican rites was both an exercise in
"whites' studied continuity with early modern English religious culture"
and a modification of it as they developed practices, such as home
rather than church baptism, that "excluded most persons of color from
Christian worship throughout the colonial period."[^33] This affected
religious life for black and white people alike, and Beasley's and L.
Nelson's works demonstrate that colonial Anglicanism's interaction with
slavery cannot be walled off from its wider history. As slavery moved to
the center of economic and cultural life in many localities, Anglican
affinities for systems of hierarchy led many supporters of the church on
both sides of the Atlantic to identify its interests with those of
masters.[^34] This desire to cultivate masters, gentry hostility to
conversion, the patterns of exclusion noted by Beasley, and black
people's own awareness and rejection of such dynamics, help to explain
why the great majority of enslaved people in the colonies remained
outside the established church. Despite the fact that Anglicans were
among the first Protestants to seek to convert slaves, it was not until
well into the nineteenth century that Christianity became a sizeable
presence within communities of enslaved people. Moreover,
evangelicalism, rather than Anglicanism, proved to be the key vehicle
for this transformation.[^35]

If, as Beasley suggests, planters found ways to modify Anglican
practices such as baptism to underline their own power, it is also the
case that the church's aspirations to be *the* church for the entirety
of the population contributed to a surprisingly enduring interest in
Christianizing the Atlantic world's black people. In what is probably
the most revisionist argument made within recent work, Annette Laing has
used the scholarship of John Thornton and others on west Africa's
connections to the Atlantic world to point out that at least some of the
enslaved people in South Carolina who were touched by Anglicanism
already knew Christianity in Africa through Catholicism. This has led
her to argue that enslaved people in South Carolina before 1750 would
not necessarily have identified Christianity with trans-Atlantic slavery
or as an aspect of their repression in the colonies, and that "contrary
to received wisdom, neither the quantity nor the quality of the American
evidence supports the belief that most Africans in the early South
Carolina Low Country rejected Anglican Christianity."[^36] Few other
recent scholars have been willing to go as far as Laing in estimating
Anglicanism's appeal to enslaved people, but it is clear that some free
and enslaved people of color did find forming connections to the
established church appealing for a wide, if variable and difficult to
unpack, array of spiritual, cultural, and political reasons.[^37]
Moreover, even as most enslaved people remained aloof or excluded from
the established church, the enslaved slave population of some parts of
the continental South and the Caribbean was proportionally so large that
black people became a sizeable part of some congregations. This has led
Robert Olwell to observe that in South Carolina, while "the church may
have been of small importance in the lives of most slaves, slaves played
a significant part in the life of the church."[^38] Together, recent
work suggests that J. Nelson's characterization of the Church of England
as "by no means a 'for whites only' institution" in Virginia is
applicable across the colonial South.[^39]

What then of evangelicals and the religious revivalism that have long
been central to the story of the religion in the South? Since Jon
Butler's challenging, now thirty years ago, of the existence of a
single, interconnected Great Awakening across the thirteen colonies,
many scholars of colonial religion have been wary of overestimating the
power of early evangelicalism, especially in the South.[^40] Heyrman's
argument that "evangelicalism came late to the American South, as an
exotic import rather than an indigenous development" has also proven
influential in this regard.[^41] Recently, however, Thomas Little has
argued for a deeper history of southern evangelicalism and the
significance to it of the particular religious dynamics present in early
eighteenth-century South Carolina. Little has noted that Presbyterian,
Baptist, Congregationalist, Quaker, French Reform, and German Reform
congregations all existed in the colony before George Whitefield's
arrival there, and argued that the presence of "very sizeable and
pluralistic non-Anglican Protestant reform and sectarian population" was
one of the "critical variables that shaped the context in which southern
evangelicalism emerged." But, in Little's analysis, it was also
important to the development of evangelicalism that the colony saw an
Anglican resurgence that produced a strong but contentious legal
establishment for the Church of England, an aggressive program of church
building, and an influx of missionary clergymen, all of which combined
to create a feeling of crisis for those dissenters who remained.[^42] In
Little's view, it was South Carolinians' active and passionate
commitment to their various churches, not their spiritual deadness, that
set the stage for the new revivalism of the 1740s and beyond.

As historians have long known and recent work underlines, early
evangelicalism's footprint was uneven: often shallow in relatively
mature coastal communities but deeper in more recently settled inland
areas.[^43] J. Nelson observed that in Virginia, for example, while
Baptists and Presbyterians became more numerous in the colony from the
1750s, "some parishes had few or no first-hand encounters with
dissenters" before the 1770s.[^44] Jewel Spangler's careful attention to
these patterns led her to argue that dissenters' and churchmen's efforts
to Christianize Virginia can partly be seen as complementary, with
Presbyterians and Baptists helping to meet religious "supply" problems
in regions underserved by the established church.[^45] While many
historians continue to stress the distinctiveness of evangelical
culture, there are also suggestions to rethink the rather too neat
divides that have been used to differentiate evangelicals from southern
Anglicans. Spangler has argued that first Presbyterians and then
Baptists simultaneously challenged Virginia's existing culture and found
ways to appeal to aspects of it. Most Baptists, she claims, "did not
leave behind their commitment to patriarchy and slavery."[^46] They were
able to expand their churches in part "because they did not stand in
stark opposition to the dominant social and political order in ways that
would have mattered the most."[^47] Likewise, others have reconsidered
overly-simplistic distinctions between tolerant evangelicals and
intolerant Anglicans. Evangelical ministers cooperated at times, but
they also competed for new adherents. Peter N. Moore has cautioned
against too strong an emphasis on a shared culture of accommodation or
toleration in the backcountry, noting that in the predominantly
Scots-Irish upcountry South Carolina settlement of the Waxhaws
"sectarian identity was strong" and that "religious outsiders---Baptists
and in particular Anglicans---came in for torrents of abuse from their
Presbyterian neighbors."[^48]

If evangelical religion was present in parts of the South at least from
the 1740s, how widely influential it was *in the colonial period*
remains a more contested issue, especially in light of the
historiographical reevaluation of Anglicanism. New forms of evangelical
religion profoundly affected the lives of some they touched, but did
this dramatically change colonial society? As Spangler has noted in her
admirably lucid and even-handed explication of the growth of the
Baptists in Virginia, "in 1775 the Baptist Church was still a tiny
dissenting sect in the most Anglican of North American colonies."[^49]
J. Nelson has cautioned that despite "contemporaneous fears, rumors, as
well as estimates to the contrary," we should remember that "evangelical
dissenters were not omnipresent in Virginia in the two or three decades
preceding the Revolution." Moreover, Nelson claims, "there is a
temptation to read the post-Revolutionary triumphs of evangelical
Protestantism back into the pre-Revolutionary decades."[^50] In Thomas
Kidd's view, however, "the Great Awakening can be acknowledged as
'great' because it produced the evangelical movement." Although, he
notes, "the movement's most explosive growth remained in the future,
eighteenth-century evangelicals had successfully established the
religion of the new birth as a permanent fixture on the American
cultural scene."[^51]

While these historians differ in their points of emphasis there is
considerable shared terrain here. As with many other aspects of early
American history, much depends on whether colonial religious history is
conceived of as a self-contained field or as the beginning of a longer
American story. Given the recent recovery of the richness and vitality
of colonial Anglicanism, it is fitting that besides being the 450th
anniversary of Jean Ribault's Huguenot expedition, 2012 marks the 350th
anniversary of the publication of the canonical 1662 edition of the Book
of Common Prayer. The southern United States would be transformed by
evangelical Protestantism, but colonial southerners' religious lives
were not spent simply waiting for its arrival.

[^1]: John T. McGrath, *The French in Early Florida: In the Eye of the Hurricane* (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2000).

[^2]: Valuable historiographical assessments of religion in the colonial South include John B. Boles, "The Discovery of Southern Religious History," in *Interpreting Southern History: Historiographical Essays in Honor of Sanford W. Higginbotham*, eds. John B. Boles and Evelyn Thomas Nolen(Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1987), 510--48; Randy J. Sparks, "Religion in the Pre-Civil War South," in *A Companion to the American South*, ed. John B. Boles(Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2002), 156--175; Jon F. Sensbach, "Before the Bible Belt: Indians, Africans, and the New Synthesis of Eighteenth Century Southern Religious History," in *Religion in the American South: Protestants and Others in History and Culture*, eds. Beth Barton Schweiger and Donald G. Mathews(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004), 5--29; and Jon F. Sensbach, "Religion and the Early South in an Age of Atlantic Empire," *Journal of Southern History*, 73 (2007): 631--42.

[^3]: See, for example, Charles Reagan Wilson, "Introduction," in *Religion in the South*, ed. Charles Reagan Wilson(Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1985), 4--5.

[^4]: Sensbach has drawn particular attention to this development. Sensbach, "Religion and the Early South in an Age of Atlantic Empire," 634--36.

[^5]: Walter H. Conser, Jr., *A Coat of Many Colors: Religion and Society Along the Cape Fear River of North Carolina* (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2006).

[^6]: Karen Ordahl Kupperman, *The Jamestown Project* (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2007), 15.

[^7]: Randy J. Sparks, *Religion in Mississippi* (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2001), 15, 19--26.

[^8]: For a recent synthesis of colonial religious development from an explicitly Atlantic perspective, see Carla Gardina Pestana, *Protestant Empire: Religion and the Making of the British Atlantic World* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009).

[^9]: Christine Leigh Heyrman, *Southern Cross: The Beginnings of the Bible Belt* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997), 6.

[^10]: Particularly influential in this regard were the syntheses of colonial American religious history produced by Patricia Bonomi and Jon Butler, which decentered New England in the nation's early religious history and stressed that colonial American culture became more, not less, influenced by institutional Protestant Christianity over time. Bonomi, *Under the Cope of Heaven: Religion, Society, and Politics in Colonial America* (1986; New York: Oxford University Press, 2003); and Jon Butler, *Awash in a Sea of Faith: Christianizing the American People* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990).

[^11]: Douglas Bradburn, "The Eschatological Origins of the English Empire," in Douglas Bradburn and John C. Coombs, eds., *Early Modern Virginia: Reconsidering the Old Dominion* (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2011), 15--56.

[^12]: Kupperman, *Jamestown Project*, 298--99.

[^13]: Eliga H. Gould, "Entangled Histories, Entangled Worlds: The English-Speaking Atlantic as a Spanish Periphery," *American Historical Review* 112, no. 3 (June 2007): 769.

[^14]: April Lee Hatfield, *Atlantic Virginia: Intercolonial Relations in the Seventeenth Century* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2004), 115, 119.

[^15]: Carla Gardina Pestana, *The English Atlantic in the Age of Revolution, 1640--1661* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004), 21.

[^16]: On the religious situation in Virginia in the English Civil War years, see Hatfield, *Atlantic Virginia*, 116--22; and Pestana, *The English Atlantic in An Age of Revolution*, 54--66, 82--85, 115--17.

[^17]: Thomas J. Little, "The Origins of Southern Evangelicalism: Revivalism in South Carolina, 1700--1740," *Church History*, 75 (2006): 785.

[^18]: John K. Nelson, *A Blessed Company: Parishes, Parsons, and Parishioners in Anglican Virginia, 1690--1776* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001), 16.

[^19]: Ibid., 7. Brent Tartar has provided a valuable overview of the scholarly reassessment of Virginian Anglicanism and situated recent works within the longer literature on the colony. Tarter, "Reflections on the Church of England in Colonial Virginia," *Virginia Magazine of History and Biography* 112 (2004): 338--71.

[^20]: Leslie J. Lindenauer, *Piety and Power: Gender and Religious Culture in the American Colonies, 1630--1700* (New York: Routledge, 2002), xviii--xix.

[^21]: Edward L. Bond, *Damned Souls in a Tobacco Colony: Religion in Seventeenth-Century Virginia* (Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 2000), 183--84. Bond's *Spreading the Gospel in Colonial Virginia: Preaching and Community: With Selected Sermons and Other Primary Documents* (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2005) begins with a brief account of religion in colonial Virginia and then presents a selection of sermons by Anglican clergymen.

[^22]: On the role of the Book of Common Prayer and other texts in Anglican piety, see Catherine Kerrison, *Claiming the Pen: Women and Intellectual Life in the Early American South* (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2006), 41; Lauren F. Winner, *A Cheerful and Comfortable Faith: Anglican Religious Practice in the Elite Households of Eighteenth-Century Virginia* (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2010), 91; Bond, *Damned Souls in a Tobacco Colony*, 264; and Heyrman, *Southern Cross*, 11.

[^23]: J. Nelson, *A Blessed Company*, 3, 32.

[^24]: Bond, *Damned Souls in a Tobacco Colony*, 245.

[^25]: Julie Anne Sweet, *William Stephens: Georgia's Forgotten Founder* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2010), 185, 200.

[^26]: J. Nelson, *A Blessed Company,* 9.

[^27]: Winner, *Cheerful and Comfortable Faith,* 2, 3--5, 17.

[^28]: Louis P. Nelson, *The Beauty of Holiness: Anglicanism & Architecture in Colonial South Carolina* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2008), 214--15.

[^29]: Heyrman, *Southern Cross*, 14--15.

[^30]: L. Nelson, *Beauty of Holiness*, 367. Emphasis added.

[^31]: L. Nelson, *Beauty of Holiness*, 258, 262.

[^32]: Nicholas M. Beasley, *Christian Ritual and the Creation of British Slave Societies* (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2009), 5--6.

[^33]: Beasley, *Christian Ritual*, 10. Winner has likewise interpreted eighteenth-century Virginian's embrace of household rather than church baptism in part as a response to the leveling implications of the baptism of enslaved people. Winner, *Cheerful and Comfortable Faith,* 44.

[^34]: On the development of Anglican attitudes toward slavery, see Travis Glasson, *Mastering Christianity: Missionary Anglicanism and Slavery in the Atlantic World* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012).

[^35]: The best account of the emergence of black Protestantism, and an excellent and early example of the benefits of considering developments in the colonial South alongside those in the Caribbean, remains Sylvia R. Frey and Betty Wood, *Come Shouting to Zion: African American Protestantism In the American South and British Caribbean to 1830* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1998).

[^36]: Annette Laing, "'Heathens and Infidels'? African Christianization and Anglicanism in the South Carolina Low Country, 1700--1750," *Religion and American Culture* 12 (2002): 200.

[^37]: Glasson, *Mastering Christianity*, 105--9.

[^38]: Robert Olwell, *Masters, Slaves, and Subjects: The Culture of Power in the South Carolina Low Country* (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1998), 107.

[^39]: J. Nelson, *Blessed* Company, 267. The work discussed here has centered on the eighteenth century. See also Rebecca Goetz's *The Baptism of Early Christianity: How Christianity Created Race (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2012) sheds much needed light on the seventeenth century.

[^40]: Jon Butler, "Enthusiasm Described and Decried: The Great Awakening as Interpretative Fiction," *Journal of American History* 69 (1982): 305--325.

[^41]: Heyrman, *Southern Cross*, 9.

[^42]: Little, "The Origins of Southern Evangelicalism," 771, 773. See also Little, "'Adding to the Church Such as Shall be Saved': The Growth in Influence of Evangelicalism in Colonial South Carolina, 1740--1775," in *Money, Trade and Power: The Evolution of Colonial South Carolina's Plantation Society*, eds. Jack P. Greene, Rosemary Brana-Shute, and Randy J. Sparks (Columbia: The University of South Carolina Press, 2001), 362--82.

[^43]: For the interconnections between American historiographies of the frontier and religion, see John Boles, "Turner, the Frontier, and the Study of Religion in America," *Journal of the Early Republic* 13 (1993): 205--16.

[^44]: J. Nelson, *A Blessed Company*, 285.

[^45]: Jewel L. Spangler, *Virginians Reborn: Anglican Monopoly, Evangelical Dissent, and the Rise of the Baptists in the Late Eighteenth Century* (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2008), 46, 77.

[^46]: Ibid., 165.

[^47]: Ibid., 4.

[^48]: Peter N. Moore, *World of Toil and Strife: Community Transformation in the Backcountry South Carolina, 1750--1805* (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 2007), 3.

[^49]: Spangler, *Virginians Reborn*, 87.

[^50]: Nelson, *A Blessed Company*, 285.

[^51]: Thomas S. Kidd, *The Great Awakening: The Roots of Evangelical Christianity in Colonial America* (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007), 323.
