---
layout: article
title: "Response to Roundtable on Class"
author: "Richard J. Callahan Jr."
author-first: "richard j."
author-last: "callahan jr."
author-note: "Richard J. Callanhan Jr. is an associate professor of
religious studies at the University of Missouri-Columbia."
vol: 13
year: 2011
---

Reading each of these thoughtful, insightful reflections on the
relationships between class and religion in the American South has been
an enriching and encouraging experience. While it may be true that class
is often overlooked as a variable in scholarship on religion, in the
South and in the United States more generally, it is here apparent that
there are good scholars who are working hard to correct for that error.
I am honored to be in the company of Ken Fones-Wolf, Jarod Roll, Alison
Collis Greene, and John Hayes in developing a trend toward the
recognition of class as important to the study of religion, and in
working through the implications of that recognition. We share this
interest with other scholars whose work is not focused on the South,
such as Heath W. Carter, Janine Giordano Drake, Sean McCloud, Evelyn
Savidge Sterne, and more.[^1] 

As class becomes more of a focus in scholarship on religion, it also
becomes clear that class has many meanings and that there are many
perspectives on class (as I pointed out in my initial piece in this
forum). It is therefore important for each of us to maintain a critical
self-awareness about *why* class matters in our scholarship,
articulating what it is that we hope to accomplish or explore through
this variable. For some, it may be fleshing out the historical record.
Others may have more political or activist motivations. Still others may
be interested in how material circumstances related to work or economy
are articulated religiously (or vice versa). Whatever the questions, we
all have a lot to learn from each other as we begin to expand the
parameters of the study of religion in relation to socioeconomic and
material contexts. I like to think that we can build upon each other's
work, pulling it into conversation with our own and pushing it into new
areas in a spirit of cooperative scholarship.

I would like to take this opportunity to comment on a few items that
especially caught my attention as I read the articles in this issue.
First and foremost, I want to thank Ken Fones-Wolf and Alison Collis
Greene for reminding me of the excellent work that has been produced on
middle class, elite, and bourgeois religion. My criticism that a great
deal of religious history has focused upon the middle class without
taking that particular socioeconomic location into account in the
analysis still stands, I think, but there is certainly a growing body of
literature that does take account of the class setting of non-working
class religion. This is a welcome development, and a necessary one for
fleshing out the importance of class to the study of religion.
Nevertheless, I think that there is still a need for more integration of
relational perspectives when dealing with class, exploring the ways that
individuals and communities in particular class locations identify
themselves and represent others with regard to religious and cultural
factors. How are religion and class articulated together to construct
and express identity and alterity in various times and places?

Greene's borrowing of Anna Weir Layne's description of "the inferior
class of sharecropper" as "the flotsam and jetsam drifting down the
Mississippi" is wonderful, and perhaps inadvertently points to an
important set of problems relating to the study of working class
religion. It is revealing to recall the maritime definitions of these
descriptive terms. While "flotsam" refers to scattered debris from a
wrecked ship that drifts around in the water or washes ashore, "jetsam"
refers to items or parts of a ship that are *intentionally* cast
overboard to lighten a ship's load. Describing part of the American
population, working or poor, as "flotsam and jetsam" is not only
dehumanizing, it also reminds us that many of those described have been
intentionally jettisoned, set apart from the larger social body. They
have been excluded from the central plot of the American (religious)
story. One reason that elites and the middle class have been favored in
historical studies, including studies of religion, is because these
groups of people left easily accessible records. Workers and poor people
and others often did not---or, rather, not in the same way. To access
their history scholars have to read documents against the grain for
evidence of "flotsam and jetsam," and they have to seek out those cast
off cultural products that have been declared worthless or irrelevant to
the story of the middle class or elites. Folksong, oral history, and
material culture are some of the products that can begin to reveal the
lives of otherwise marginalized individuals and communities. Methods of
scholarship that work to analyze and interpret such data are therefore
essential tools in the toolbox of studies of class. Also, critical
methods that explore the relationships between "flotsam and jetsam" and
cultural gatekeepers, including scholars themselves, are necessary.

Jarod Roll explains in his article that he discovered that there was a
great deal more to the lives of members of the Southern Tenant Farmers'
Union than what was revealed in the union's archived papers. "The
organization history quickly broke down," he writes, as he began to find
correlations between STFU membership and participation in emerging
sectarian religious communities. What was the connection here? In what
ways did this correlation matter? Stretching beyond organization
history, Roll reached for language, finding abundant scriptural
quotations in archival papers. This led to his decision to explore the
cosmologies of the New South's working people to find the connection
between religious and political rebellion. His conclusions are exciting
and suggestive for historians of southern labor. Religion also provides
idioms, rituals and performance styles, modes of community, and models
of self, other, and value that go beyond the intellectual, beyond ways
of thinking, into ways of acting and relating. Pentecostalism, for
instance, not only provided rebellious theology but also modes of
embodiment in relation to power and materiality that merged in
sometimes-explosive ways with movements of organized labor. As Ken
Fones-Wolf asks, "How did the smells, sounds, and body language of
services contribute to and differentiate working-class religious
practices?" Extending this question, I would also ask how those visceral
aspects of religious practices informed labor and contributed to social
struggles.

Conversely, John Hayes brings a different question to his work, asking
instead how the material conditions of poverty formed and shaped a
"hard, hard religion." This is a question that interests me very much,
and I find Hayes's analysis helpful. My background in folklore, however,
compels me to comment on Hayes's choice to call the religion of poor
people "folk religion." While this is a common usage, it is also a
problematic one. As Leonard Norman Primiano noted in his 1995 critique
of the term in *Western Folklore*, naming something "folk religion"
implies a distinction from "official" religion that is empirically
unsustainable. "This practice both residualizes the religious lives of
believers," Primiano wrote, "and at the same time reifies the
authenticity of religious institutions as the exemplar of human
religiosity."[^2]  When scholars grant institutional (and
typically middle class) religious forms the name of "religion," pure and
simple, while also marking religious practices of working and poor
people as a special type of religion with the name "folk"---which has a
complex history in relation to the construction of the "flotsam and
jetsam" mentioned by Greene---the effect is to "normalize" and legitimize
the middle class discourse on religion that defines itself as normative.
It jettisons the religious lives of working and poor people from the
defining center. I think that "hard, hard religion" describes the
subject of Hayes's work more respectfully and accurately. He writes of
the hard religion that emerges from a hard life, a grappling with the
unyielding solidity of material and structural forces that shape and
form individuals and communities and through which they define
themselves. It is a form of religious orientation that cuts across
racial and regional lines, Hayes says, because it is based on a shared
experience. Primiano suggests the term "vernacular" be used rather than
"folk," illuminating the way that *all* religion is embedded within
specific social, historical, cultural, and material contexts.
"Vernacular religion" is not a special type of religion, but a method or
perspective for studying all religion, wherever it is situated, as it is
lived.[^3]  It thus describes a relation, and opens the door to
exploring how various vernaculars are related to class experiences.

Finally, this forum suggests the need, and the potential, for increased
interdisciplinary work among scholars who are interested in religion and
class. I note that I am the sole religious studies scholar among this
group of historians, and I am encouraged by the similarities in our
interests. I am also aware of the distinctions, as noted by Ken
Fones-Wolf, between the conversations going on in labor history,
American religious history, and southern history. Historians, though
they share a discipline, are often shaped by the discourses of their
specializations. My hope is that interdisciplinary conversations might
bridge some gaps in knowledge and method, and we might teach and learn
from each other to produce more informed and critically aware
scholarship. If nothing else, emphasizing class as a category in the
study of religion in the early-twentieth century South might open up
such conversations.

[^1]:  Heath W. Carter, "Scab Ministers, Striking Saints: Christianity and Class Conflict in 1894 Chicago," *American Nineteenth Century History* 11 (Sept. 2010): 321--349; Sean McCloud, *Divine Hierarchies: Class in American Religion and Religious Studies* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2007); Evelyn Savidge Sterne, *Ballots and Bibles: Ethnic Politics and the Catholic Church in Providence* (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2003); and Sterne, "Bringing Religion into Working-Class History: Parish, Public, and Politics in Providence, 1890--1930," *Social Science History* 24 (Spring 2000): 149--182. 
 
[^2]: Leonard Norman Primiano, "Vernacular Religion and the Search for Method in Religious Folklife," *Western Folklore* 54 (Jan. 1995): 39.

[^3]:  "Vernacular religion" is nearly synonymous with the popular term "lived religion," though the use of the term "vernacular" carries with it the weight of theoretical and methodological concerns that have been forged in the study of localized language use, architectural design, and cultural performances.
