---
layout: article
title: "The Work of Class in Southern Religion"
author: "Richard J. Callahan Jr."
author-first: Richard J.
author-last: Callahan Jr.
author-note: "Richard J. Callanhan Jr. is an associate professor of
religious studies at the University of Missouri-Columbia."
vol: 13
year: 2011
---

In the history of American media representations, the South—or some
imagination of the South—has figured prominently in how Americans figure
class. To make a character working class, simply give him or her a thick
southern accent. It is a move that shows up from Jeff Foxworthy and
Larry the Cable Guy to Mater, the tow truck in Disney Pixar's *Cars*
(2006), starring Lightning McQueen.[^1] As a bonus with this
signification, along with class comes ignorance. Likewise, a slightly
different southern accent combined with dressy clothing and a plantation
mansion works nicely to signify upper class snobbery. Obviously, the
South is far more diverse and complicated. But what class is, exactly,
and what it has to do with understanding southern religion, is far from
clear. I do not have a definitive insight into "how the study of
religion in the early twentieth-century South might appear differently
if scholars emphasized class as a category of analysis" (the question
that prompts the essays in this forum). But I have spent some time
considering the relationship of work and labor to religion in the
eastern Kentucky coalfields, and I can share some of what I have learned
about the intersections of class and religion in the course of that
research. 

As a category of analysis, class has been figured in multiple ways—each
of which lends itself to a very different sort of significance in terms
of how it might affect the study of southern religion. Should class be
explored primarily as a structural condition or as an experience? Should
class be understood mainly in relation to poverty and wealth, or to
authority, or to relations of power? To what extent is "class
consciousness"—the self-awareness of members of a class as belonging to
that class—essential to the analysis? Is class most relevant when
related to political mobilization, to the emergence of organized labor,
for instance, or as an issue of culture, aesthetics, or social
distinctions? Each of these issues, all valid, influences the type of
data and evidence the scholar will find significant, and the types of
questions he or she will pursue in making sense of that evidence.

When it comes to tying class to religion, central Appalachia has been
something of a laboratory for the application of explanatory models. The
"discovery" (or "invention") of Appalachia as a region with an
identifiably distinct culture came into existence around the 1880s, at
which time "mountain whites" also came to be identified by outsiders as
"poor white trash."[^2]  The representation stuck, taking on
new meanings as the region became increasingly enmeshed in the
industrial economy as a source of natural resources (primarily coal and
timber). Religion, poverty, and coal mining came to be three major
signifiers of Appalachia in the popular media. Along the way, the
religious ideas and practices of mountain residents became the data for
studies and theories related to religion, class, and social
disaffection. In the main, the prevailing perspective interpreted
"deviant" religious practices such as serpent handling, faith healing,
emotional preaching, and biblical literalism as compensatory response to
economic, social, and psychological deprivation.[^3]  A
"culture of poverty" expressed itself religiously in "fatalistic" and
fantastic beliefs and practices. Conversely, critics from a different
angle have asserted that the "fatalism" of Appalachian religion has been
largely to blame for a lack of social and economic motivation. In short,
the religious practices of Appalachia are either the cause or the effect
of poverty, which is inevitably also part of the story of the
industrialization of coal mining in the region. Studies such as these
are crucial as data to explore the process of how, as religious studies
scholar Sean McCloud put it, "certain religious groups, beliefs, and
practices came to be associated with certain socioeconomic
classifications."[^4] 

I find such studies frustrating and not terribly helpful for
understanding how religion "works" in the real world and in its class
dimensions. It has been nearly fifty years since E. P. Thompson argued
that "class is a relationship, not a thing." He added, "we cannot
understand class unless we see it as a social and cultural formation,
arising from processes which can be studied as they work themselves out
over a considerable historical period."[^5]  I find Thompson's
observations to be a useful starting point for thinking about how class
and religion are related, and how attention to class might impact the
study of religion. Three points in particular stand out for me: 1) class
is a process, and religion is part of that process of the formation of
class. It is not something distinct from class; 2) once "classified,"
religion can become a powerful resource for identity and survival; and
3) because class is a relationship, one cannot fruitfully study only one
class in isolation. The working class is defined by its relationship to,
and distinction from, another class or classes, which in turn are
constituted by their distinction from and relationship to the working
class. I will discuss each of these points broadly in relation to my own
work on religion in the eastern Kentucky coalfields.

### 1

The process of class formation is easier to see, perhaps, in eastern
Kentucky than elsewhere because of the abrupt and spatialized nature of
industrialization there. Though vastly oversimplified, there was
something to Appalachians' sense that industrialists were "foreigners,"
not natives of the mountains. As one observer put it, "suddenly the
'retarded frontier' was rediscovered" in the 1880s, and two types of
"outsiders" came rushing into the mountains: "those who saw the natural
resources and sought them regardless of the interests of the natural
owners; and those who with missionary zeal rushed to educate and
reform."[^6]  Thus the transformation of the eastern Kentucky
landscape and social fabric through the introduction of industrial coal
mining went hand in hand with cultural forces of modernity that sought
to transform Appalachian culture through education and religion. As
eastern Kentucky natives were converted into industrial workers, they
often identified their bosses' cultural forms (and those that entered
the mountains alongside the coal industry) as "foreign" to mountain
culture. What this meant for class formation was that cultural resources
and traditions became markers of class distinction. Of course the
reality was always more complicated than that, and some mountain natives
quickly joined the ranks of the industrialists. But often, part of that
economic alignment entailed a social and cultural re-alignment as well.
Religion was a privileged forum for this differentiation. Non-mountain
observers described mountain religious practices as backwards, ignorant,
and emotional, while mountain natives saw what they termed "railroad
religion" (because it came in with the railroads) as cold,
intellectualized, and too focused on worldly matters. Yet it is
important to note that these were not solely theological or doctrinal
differences. They were part and parcel of social and economic
distinctions that were also being formed at the time. In other words, it
is not the case that class preceded religious practice or vice versa;
religious and class distinctions formed together, constituting one
another, taking on particular resonations of significance in the
contextualized process of economic, social, and cultural transformation
in this place.

### 2

Religion, as it is lived, takes up the matters of everyday life and
makes something of them. In eastern Kentucky, religious traditions took
on new significance in the class context by providing identity,
legitimation of values, and alternative sources of authority from those
who dominated the industrial economy. Constituted anew by both their
distinctions from "railroad religion" and the impositions of "outsiders"
to dismiss them as ignorant and replace them, local religious traditions
became part of the battlefield of class and industry. Representations of
footwashing, emotional preaching, unaccompanied singing, anti-missionary
positions, and faith healing came to be synonymous, for much of
twentieth-century America, with poverty and ignorance. But it also
became a source of oppositional identity and cultural pride for mountain
natives. Viewed this way, the continued presence of such religious
practices (including organizational forms like Old Regular Baptist
associations and independent churches) appears less as something old
that will not change or go away, and more as an intentional choice in a
highly charged context. As Deborah Vansau McCauley has noted, with this
background the appearance of independent Holiness and Pentecostal
churches in central Appalachia during this time needs to be rethought as
well: they were not psychological or social "compensation" for
deprivation, nor simply the influence of the spread of Pentecostalism in
the United States. Rather, the Holiness and Pentecostal churches in the
mountains were resignified, re-charged, intensified versions of
already-existing local religious practices that were consciously
engaging with new forces shaping mountain life.[^7] 

At times, these culturally and religiously important distinctions could
lead to political mobilization for social change, becoming important
foundations for organizing labor unions. At other times, they redirected
dissatisfaction toward ritual, theological, or other performative
responses. Several studies have explored these dynamics and their
complexity. Sociologist Dwight Billings, in particular, provides
interesting conclusions about the conditions that might lead to churches
and preachers supporting the powers of capital in some cases, while
leading resistance in others. The corollary is that racial attitudes,
not theology, divided southern churches in the first half of the
twentieth century.[^8] Comparing the history of the
early-twentieth century West Virginia and eastern Kentucky coalfields,
where religion contributed to labor opposition, to the case of labor
struggles in the textile-manufacturing communities in the southern
Piedmont in North Carolina, where churches and religious leaders
supported the powers of industry, Billings concludes that the religious
leaders in the southern Piedmont "identified with the
planter-industrialists' hegemonic project of building a New South,"
while most clergy in the coal fields identified with (and were often
themselves) laborers. Following Antonio Gramsci, Billings determines
that churches in the coal fields offered crucial elements that the
southern Piedmont lacked for the formation of an oppositional culture:
autonomous organizations (free spaces), organic intellectuals, and
social interactions that could sustain an oppositional
worldview.[^9]  Billing's analysis is primarily institutional,
leaving aside questions concerning whether or not there is something
particularly *religious* about the oppositional culture that churches
and religious leaders helped to create and sustain.

Most important in considering the intertwinings of religion and class,
in my mind, is to be aware of religion as something *made*, something
*produced* and *reworked* by human beings in particular contexts.
Religion does not just emerge on its own, nor does it just determine how
people will think or act. This means taking the *work* of religion into
account, examining both the possibilities and the limitations that
particular religious and cultural resources provided and how people
worked with them in producing and reproducing selves, worlds,
communities, and material conditions.

Some of the most innovative and powerful religious productions in the
1920s and 1930s in eastern Kentucky in relation to class structures and
experiences had to do with the signification and performance of the
tactile world of coal mining. Ever-present coal dust, the daily dangers
of underground mining, the broken bodies of miners and diseased bodies
of miners' families, the transformations of the mountains and even new
commodities—these became the raw material of religious performance and
ritual, from faith healing to song, from morally mapping the physical
and cultural landscape to locating places of worship. Class was
spatialized, commodified, sensed, and otherwise materialized in ways
that tied into the embodied performances of mountain religious
traditions.[^10]  Contrary to widely held views that these
traditions were "otherworldly," the reality on the ground shows them to
be deeply engaged with the material world.

### 3

In considering what an emphasis on class as a category of analysis might
reveal about southern religion, it is also important to bear in mind
that class does not only mean "working class." It seems that when
scholars invoke the term "class" they are often concerned with the
politics and power of workers and labor. I strongly support scholarship
that recovers the lives and stories of the hard-working people who are
too often overlooked in our studies, and whose experiences illuminate
otherwise unrecognized social and material dynamics. Nevertheless, if
class is to be understood as a *relational process* within fields of
power, then the formation and practices of middle and upper classes are
also a constitutive part of the story. In the context of southern
religion, this means that scholarship should be attentive to the
"classifying" of religious organizations, orientations, and practices,
exploring how various religious bodies and performances are represented
and discursively framed. How is it that physical comportment, levels of
emotional display, musical styles, and even volume of worship become
linked to categories of class? What is at stake in such representations?
Too often, "normative" forms turn out to be those religious activities
embraced as proper by the middle class. Thus, scholars must also be
self-critical and reflexive about their own class locations and
assumptions as they frame their analyses.

In the central Appalachian case, scholars have often asked why the
working class or the disempowered practice the kinds of religion that
they do. When viewed as a historical process, however, the relationship
between religion and class calls forth different questions. Why did
people change denominations and religious styles, moving away from the
traditions they grew up with, as they moved socially and economically
away from the working class? In what ways did the worship practices and
religious styles embraced by the middle class sacralize or otherwise
legitimize capitalism, consumerism, and class distinctions? How were the
rhetorics of progress and development that were embraced by
missionaries, social workers, labor activists, and industrial
capitalists related? How did they promote an orientation to the world
that constituted central Appalachian religion and culture as
"other"?[^11]  As eastern Kentucky miners took up the
materials of their world and made them into things of religious
significance, so too did the middle class take up the resources of
economic practices and social development and forge religious selves
from these raw materials.

### \*\*\*

Paying attention to class might reveal any number of things about
southern religion in the early twentieth century, depending upon what
aspects or models of class a scholar wishes to emphasize. Insisting that
class is a process, a dynamic of relations, has helped me to see
religion as a central element in the formation of class, and class
structures and experiences as tremendous forces and resources through
which religion is practiced and performed. Paying attention to class, in
this sense, means paying attention to religion as dynamic, as engaged,
and as a form of work that must be deeply contextualized in its material
and social fabric. It also means emphasizing the processes by and
through which different communities—classes—understand themselves in
relation to others, and how those understandings produce particular
religious selves.

I have left a lot unexplored in this short piece. The most blatant
omissions have to do with gender and race. Class has often taken a back
seat to race as a category of analysis structuring studies of southern
religion. Yet, as Martin Luther King Jr. increasingly saw toward the end
of his life, these two concerns are deeply interrelated. Slavery was
race-based in the United States, but it also needs to be accounted for
in terms of work, labor, and social structure. The study of issues of
religion and class as they have related to race in the South will be an
important area of historical work. Gender, too, is thoroughly entangled
with class. In the eastern Kentucky coalfields, gender roles and
responsibilities transformed dramatically with the introduction of
industrial mining and a money economy, and these changes had effects on
religious practice, obligation, and authority. Ideally, gender, race and
class should all be strongly considered in studies of southern religion.

The importance of class to the study of southern religion goes beyond
the relationship of religious organizations or leaders to the emerging
labor movement, or any other nascent political or social mobilization.
It goes beyond theories of deprivation and compensation. It goes to the
heart of the dynamic labor of religion as it is actually lived in
particular places, intersecting with all of the forces that shape the
lives of individuals, families, and communities. Insofar as class is a
major shaping force, as it must be in a capitalist economy, then class
will be an essential category of analysis for understanding southern
religion.

[^1]:  Larry the Cable Guy provided the voice of Mater; Texas native Owen Wilson provided the voice of Lightning McQueen.

[^2]:  Allen W. Batteau, *The Invention of Appalachia* (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1990); Henry D. Shapiro, *Appalachia on Our Mind: The Southern Mountains and Mountaineers in the American Consciousness, 1879–1920* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1978); Anonymous, "Poor White Trash," *Cornhill Magazine* 45 (May 1882): 688.

[^3]:  See Deborah Vansau McCauley, *Appalachian Mountain Religion: A History* (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1995). One influential example is Weston La Barre, *They Shall Take Up Serpents: Psychology of the Southern Snake-Handling Cult* (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1962).

[^4]:  Sean McCloud, "The Ghost of Marx and the Stench of Deprivation: Cutting the Ties that Bind in the Study of Religion and Class," in *Religion and Class in America: Culture, History, and Politics*, ed. McCloud and William A. Mirola (Leiden: Brill, 2009), 97. See also Sean McCloud, *Divine Hierarchies: Class in American Religion and Religious Studies* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2009).

[^5]:  E. P. Thompson, *The Making of the English Working Class* (New York: Random House, 1963), 11.

[^6]:  Olive Dame Campbell, "Flame of a New Future for the Highlands," *Southern Mountain Life and Work* 1 (April 1925): 11.

[^7]:  McCauley, *Appalachian Mountain Religion*, 265–67.

[^8]:  John Gaventa *Power and Powerlessness: Quiescence and Rebellion in an Appalachian Valley* (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1980); Helen Matthews Lewis, Sue Easterling Kobak, and Linda Johnson, "Family, Religion and Colonialism in Central Appalachia, or Bury My Rifle at Big Stone Gap," in *Colonialism in Modern America: The Appalachian Case*, ed. Helen Matthews Lewis, Linda Johnson, and Donald Askins (Boone, N.C.: Appalachian Consortium Press, 1978); Dwight B. Billings, "Religion as Opposition: A Gramscian Analysis," *American Journal of Sociology* 96 (July 1990): 1–31.

[^9]:  Billings, "Religion as Opposition," 27.

[^10]:  See Richard J. Callahan Jr., *Work and Faith in the Kentucky Coal Fields: Subject to Dust* (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2009), and Richard J. Callahan Jr., "Sensing Class: Religion, Aesthetics, and Formations of Class in Eastern Kentucky's Coal Fields," in *Religion and Class in America*, 175–96.

[^11]:  For example, see Susan Curtis, *A Consuming Faith: The Social Gospel and Modern American Culture* (Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 2001); Richard J. Callahan Jr., Kathryn Lofton, and Chad Seales, "Allegories of Progress: Industrial Religion in the United States," *Journal of the American Academy of Religion* 88 (2010): 1–39; John M. Giggie and Diane H. Winston, eds., *Faith in the Market: Religion and the Rise of Urban Commercial Culture* (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2002).
