---
layout: article
title: "Response to Roundtable on Class"
author: "Ken Fones-Wolf"
author-first: Ken
author-last: Fones-Wolf
author-note: "Ken Fones-Wolf is professor of history at West Virginia University."
vol: 13
year: 2011
---

Reading the contributions of the fine young scholars to this roundtable
confirms my optimism about the future of this small company of
historians interested in the intersection of class and religion in the
South. I learned a great deal from their musings and will shamelessly
use their suggestions when I return to my own work. Especially useful,
it seems to me, is the way that Richard Callahan and Alison Greene flip
the questions that historians typically ask about why the disempowered
practice the kinds of religion they do and instead call for
interrogating the religious practices, styles, rhetorics, and
representations embraced by the middle class that legitimized capitalism
and marginalized those of working people. Equally imaginative is Jarod
Roll's proposition that scholars pay close attention to the particular
Biblical passages recited by groups and the precise context in which
they are used. These can, as Roll demonstrates, tell us a good deal
about the theological and eschatological meanings that undergird social
movements.

There are a number of issues (perhaps even most) on which we all seem to
agree. For example, there is agreement that southern religion
scholarship has been shaped a bit too much by concerns with race to the
exclusion of class or gender, but that most southerners were acutely
cognizant of class differences. Similarly, denominational choice was
less the result of class formation and more a part of the*process*of
class formation and identification. Also noted is the need to go beyond
the traditional denominational sources that form the resource base of
much (but certainly not all) of the history of southern religion, as
well as to read all sources with a sensitivity to the unexpected links
between sacred and the secular realms. However, all of us have a healthy
respect for what scholars of southern religion have achieved, and view
this primarily as an opportunity to suggest other fruitful paths to
follow.

One of these fruitful paths should include mobility, both social and
geographical. Both John Hayes and Richard Callahan remind us that upward
mobility often meant changing denominational affiliations, but we do
less well at capturing the precise moments and motivations for such
change, or even what meanings were attached to such changes. Even more
important is Greene's cue that geographic mobility was a marker of
poverty and class, often hindering or obscuring the religious practices
of the poor and incurring the disdain of the middle class. This insight
might also offer additional clues to Callahan's (and Dwight Billings's)
efforts to compare the impact of religious sentiments in Kentucky
coalfields with those in Piedmont mill villages. Many millhands were
migrants, experiencing spatial as well as social dislocations. The only
churches they found in the village were, at first, those provided by the
mill owners, who also paid the minister's salary. In contrast, Harlan
County's coal mines drew heavily from local people who kept their
religious communities intact and relied upon their own lay preachers.
When railroads and "railroad religion" invaded Harlan, the already
existing religious communities helped miners cope with or protest the
destruction of their way of life.

Attention to migration should also caution us against generalizing too
easily about working class composition. For example, Harlan County's
mine workforce was very different from that in nearby West Virginia,
where operators recruited thousands of workers from Hungary, Italy, and
the South's Black Belt and where native-born miners were more likely to
remain in mainstream Baptist and especially Methodist churches.
Appalachian folk religion was varied and complex. Of course, as John
Hayes, Alison Greene, and I pointed out in our first contributions to
this roundtable, remaining in mainstream denominations still afforded
working people an opportunity to give their own distinctive styles to
worship.

It is interesting to see my co-contributors be so careful about defining
class, even to the point of reviving the ghost of E. P. Thompson. I
applaud Callahan for his emphasis on class as both a process and a
relationship. However, I admit to being a bit befuddled by John Hayes's
discussion of class at first. After suggesting that the cultural
construction of class may not exist in all societies, he then follows by
asserting that the New South "was both acutely race- *and*
class-conscious." It might help if, *a la* Thompson, he separated the
experience of class (the identity of some people's interests as between
themselves, and as against others whose interests are different from
and/or opposed to theirs) from class consciousness ("the way in which
these experiences are handled in cultural terms: embodied in traditions,
value-systems, ideas, and institutional forms").[^1] 
Nevertheless, Hayes says a number of very smart things about the ways
that applying a class analysis to the hegemonic evangelicalism of the
middle and upper classes of the early twentieth-century South can help
us better understand the internal denominational divisions that were
very much a part of a hidden history of southern Protestantism.

Finally, I am impressed that all of us feel that the appearance of
independent Holiness and Pentecostal churches reflect something other
than fatalism or psychological or social compensation, although Greene's
caution about romanticizing the religion of the dispossessed is solid
advice. In fact, some of the contributors to this roundtable might be
pushing a bit too hard in the other direction, seeing non-mainstream
churches as sites where working people searched for an oppositional
authority. Maybe they did at times, but probably other things were going
on as well. In addition, as both Greene and Hayes point out, we will do
well to remember that most of the poor did not gravitate to Holiness and
Pentecostal churches. Instead, the poor of both races articulated and
confronted the "insecurity, instability, frustration, and
marginalization" that structured their lives largely in local Baptist
and Methodist churches. Regardless, we also need to expand our study of
social movements and acknowledge that the poor might strive to assert
power in both the spiritual as well as the temporal realm.

[^1]:  E. P. Thompson, *The Making of the English Working Class* (New York: Vintage Books, 1966), 9--10.
