---
layout: article
title: "Response to Roundtable on Class"
author: "Alison Collis Greene"
author-first: Alison Collis
author-last: Greene
author-note: "Alison Collis Greene is an assistant professor of history
at Mississippi State University."
vol: 13
year: 2011
---

It is striking that more than half of the contributors to this
roundtable expressed a degree of uncertainty or surprise at our
inclusion in a conversation about religion and class. Ken Fones-Wolf and
Jarod Roll identify first as labor historians, while I am primarily a
religious historian. As each of my co-commentators noted, a lot of
historians write about religion and class. Yet the two fields are still
far enough apart that it seems odd to call oneself a historian of both
labor and religion without qualifying one interest or the other. All of
us argue that southern religious history and southern labor history have
too infrequently overlapped. Fortunately, the contributors to this
conversation have already begun to bridge that gap, not only writing
histories that do both but also showing that each field is incomplete
without the other.

A point that each of us makes in some fashion but that nonetheless bears
repeating is that attention to religion and class should illuminate, and
not obscure, our understanding of race in southern religious and labor
history. Class and race are not competing categories of analysis;
rather, they are intertwined. The Southern Tenant Farmers' Union remains
fascinating to historians not only because its leaders quickly learned
to keep every scrap of paper that came into their hands, but also
because its very existence proved that poor black and white southerners
might unite voluntarily against the wealthier men who worked to divide
them. Without exaggerating the depth of that unity or its
disproportionate benefit for white union members, Roll demonstrates both
in *Spirit of Rebellion* and in his contribution to this discussion that
the union's racial unity depended in large part on a shared religious
and moral vision incomprehensible---and often aimed at---the region's white
power brokers. The religious and work experiences of both black and
white union members become comprehensible because Roll describes the
interconnections between their racial, class, and religious identities.

Of course, the other key power dynamic that historians of southern
religion and class must contend with is gender. Each of the five of us
acknowledges this; none of the five of us discussed the interplay
between race, class, and gender in southern religion as fully as we
might. Historians have long understood that women in early evangelical
and Pentecostal churches found opportunities for leadership unavailable
to women in the major denominations.[^1]  What struck me in my
research, however, was the degree to which female clergy and female
religious leaders seemed an accepted part of the religious landscape in
Memphis and the Delta, so long as they remained in the churches of the
poor.

In 1937, the local paper in Jonesboro, Arkansas featured Elder Ida M.
Collins in an article entitled "Church of God Is One of Most Active
Institutions in City." Seventy-two year old Collins had moved her two
rural congregations to Jonesboro in 1930, where she founded and led the
Original Church of God (Holiness) mission, a church of 25 white men and
women. Although it included several photographs of Collins and her
church, the column never directly addressed the question of female
church leadership and focused instead on Collins's church's history and
work.[^2]  In churches where women could not stand in the
pulpit, they nonetheless took charge. Federal Writers' Project
researchers in Jackson, Mississippi, seemed baffled by a black holiness
church that was "almost purely a women's organization," led by "three
Mothers of the Church" and a priest, "the only masculine sex who is
active in the operation of the church."[^3]  What was most
remarkable about these stories and the many others like them was that
they did not seem remarkable at all to the reporters and researchers who
recorded them.

That women often worked as clergy or leaders in southern churches in the
first half of the twentieth century is neither surprising nor the point.
I have already discussed the excellent work by historians of southern
women and religion, much of it focused on the active work of
middle-class women both inside and outside the church. But we have more
to learn about the relationship between poor women's roles in their
churches and their roles in their families and communities. To what
degree did poor women's leadership in churches connect to their roles at
home and at work? How did this leadership affect women's roles in labor
protest and organization? Did poor southern women define leadership and
activism in the same terms as middle-class women, or did they understand
their work differently? Relatedly, what roles did poor men see for
themselves in their churches, and how did they connect their place in
churches with their place in the home and the field or factory? How do
the answers to these questions differ for poor black southerners and
poor white southerners?

None of these questions are new, and each of the historians I have
discussed above addresses them on some level. But we can learn much more
about the contours and transformations of southern religious history in
the first half of the twentieth century by considering questions like
these using class as a primary category of analysis, and with the poor
or working class as a central focus. The contours of American religious
and political life in the twentieth century become comprehensible only
when we are attentive not only to power dynamics of race and gender but
also to those of class, and to the interplay among the three.

[^1]:  See, for instance, Catherine A. Brekus, *Strangers and Pilgrims: Female Preaching in America, 1740--1845* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1998); Anthea D. Butler*, Women in the Church of God in Christ: Making a Sanctified World*(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2007); Cheryl Townsend Gilkes, *If It Wasn't for the Women: Black Women's Experience and Womanist Culture in Church and Community* (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 2001); Matthew Avery Sutton*, Aimee Semple McPherson and the Resurrection of Christian America*(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2007). 
 
[^2]:  "Original Church of God (Holiness), Jonesboro, Craighead County, Folder 119, Box 429, Arkansas Church Records. 
 
[^3]:  Douglass Carr, "Holiness Church," Jackson, Mississippi, n.d., p. 1, Federal Writer's Project Negro Source Material, Mississippi Department of Archives and History. 
