---
layout: article
title: "Review: George F. Root: Civil War Songwriter"
author: Ralph Hartsock
author-first: Ralph
author-last: Hartsock
author-note: "Ralph Hartsock is the senior music cataloger at the Music
Library of the University of North Texas."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "Polly H. Carder. <em>George F. Root: Civil War
Songwriter</em>. Jefferson,
N.C.: McFarland, 2008. 239 pp. ISBN 9780886433742."
---

In a very engaging text, Polly Carder begins by setting the scene of
1862, with the Union losing the Civil War, and the experience of Tad
Lincoln at the theater in March of 1864.[^1]  As a chorus
onstage sang "The Battle Cry of Freedom," they were joined by the
president's son. The author points out the moral significance of the
song "The Battle Cry of Freedom" at a time when the Union was not doing
well.

The first chapter describes the family into which George Frederick Root
was born, and his childhood environment. Born in Sheffield,
Massachusetts on August 30, 1820, he was sensitive to music at a very
early age. While most children would fall asleep as their mothers sang
lullabies, George Root was wide eyed. Carder traces much of the family
lineage, maternal and paternal. Although his mother wanted to name him
Frederick Handel Root, after the great composer, the father, Frederick
Ferdinand Root, thought one Frederick in the family would be enough.
Young George was surrounded at the rural Willow Farm by several
musicians.

The author chronicles his early career, noting that young George played
the flute and considered a position in a theater orchestra; at the time,
this was not the most reputable job. In late 1838, Root went to Boston
to housesit for A.N. Johnson of Harmony Hall. He auditioned for a
position at the school, but was advised to learn to play the piano,
something that has endured to the present in American music education.
Root practiced hymns on the piano, as suggested from Johnson's published
method (not cited in the text). These tunes would influence him greatly,
but Root had to wait to learn piano until he was eighteen because owning
a piano in rural America was rare, the piano being more prevalent in an
urban environment.

Root later took voice lessons from Lowell Mason, and sang in his choirs.
In Boston, Root was exposed to much fine music, artists such as Ole
Bull, and the Boston Handel and Haydn Society. Henry Russell also
exerted influence, traceable from his Civil War songs, descriptive songs
about the world around him, becoming American popular music. Root later
became an apprentice, then partner to Johnson, performing as organist at
two major churches, and directing their choirs. One of these was the
significant Park Street Church in Boston.

Carder relates many details from Root's autobiography (*The Story of a
Musical Life: An Autobiography*, 1891). His shoes became muddy as he
walked in what became Madison Square. He had a diverse clientele of
young women from wealthy families, young men studying theology, resident
students at the New York State Institution for the Blind (where he met
Fanny Crosby, who became one of his lyricists).

Root's first piece of sheet music, "See the Sky is Darkling" (1845),
depicts an alcoholic revel and its consequences. A later song, "Clear
Cold Water" (1852) appeared in the May 1, 1852, issue of *The New York
Musical Review and Choral Advocate*. The August 1 issue included his
"The Noble Law of Maine," referring to Maine's 1851 law prohibiting
manufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages.

At the New York Institution for the Blind he conducted a 60 voice choir.
During his lifetime, Root would write and compile over 70 books,
beginning with *The Young Ladies' Choir Book* (1846). Even though his
career as a church musician was successful, Root desired higher cultural
recognition. Quartet Root, with his wife Mary Olive, sister Cynthia, and
brother Towner, joining George, was a well balanced vocal ensemble.
Former student Henry T. Lincoln joined in the quintets. He especially
liked the recent part songs of Felix Mendelssohn (1809-1847), and
madrigals and glees from earlier periods. Theodore Eisfeld, conductor of
the New York Philharmonic society heard them, and invited them to
perform at a concert. After the first song the orchestral musicians
joined the applause---what Root called passing "the highest musical
tribunal" (29). Not only religious, Root lectured on opera excerpts in
September, 1850, in Livingston County, New York. His songs were
published in *The Choral Advocate and Singing Class Journal*. Root was a
contributing editor as well; at the time people wrote letters to the
editor that expressed their musical opinions.

When Root went to Paris in 1851 for study and exposure to culture, the
Mercer Street Church, held a farewell concert. Fanny Crosby also wrote a
farewell song for Root. In Paris, on July 4, 1851, Root sang some
American patriotic tunes, and then "The Marseillaise"---banned in France.
The next month he returned to New York to collaborate with Fanny Crosby
on *The Flower Queen*, a cantata---the word cantata was used to
differentiate the harmless stage production from the opera or music
hall. *The Flower Queen* was produced 500 times.

Root's song "Pictures of Memory" was more of an art song, printed in its
entirety on pages 40-47. Melodic intervals are advanced, but Root used
it to quell criticism of his popular music. And the popular music sold
better. Besides this, Root knew the European masters had composed high
quality art songs. He also admired Stephen Foster's songs "because they
spoke so directly to the people" (48).

True to the subtitle, *Civil War Songwriter*, two full chapters describe
Root's compositions for the Union during that war, "Tramp! Tramp!
Tramp!," "The Battle Cry of Freedom," and "Just before the Battle,
Mother." The author also describes how music was used as military
propaganda or in the newspapers during the Civil War. Not only did "The
Battle Cry of Freedom" serve as the masthead for the Chicago Tribune's
announcement that Lincoln had been re-elected President, the song found
its way into the Confederate prisons of Libby and Andersonville.

Carder reveals several aspects of life in nineteenth century America,
including religion, current events, and the Civil War: Root was
instrumental in getting music classes into the public schools, something
unheard of until the late 1830s. Religion shaped Root's music, both
sacred and secular. Attending opera or theater productions conflicted
with religious and moral beliefs of the time, so Root, like others,
developed the cantata as a dramatic musical piece that was moral. Carder
also defines the classical and popular music of the period by showing
how newspapers and magazines classified their advertisements as "Music
for the Drawing Room" and "Music for the People."

Following the Civil War, Root turned his attention to the "next greatest
evil," composing *The Musical Fountain* (1866) in support of temperance.
Current events shaped Root's music as well--a *Grant Songster* (1868)
supported Ulysses S. Grant for president; "The Pacific Railroad" (1869)
commemorated the golden spike that completed the transcontinental
railroad. Carder presents details of the great Chicago fire (1871),
which consumed the Root & Cady store; they lost all sheet music, but
their plates and copyrights survived.

Attitudes of the times also influenced music, particularly the issues of
death, mother, and temperance. "People sang unselfconsciously about
death" (40). Lyrics were grieving, but many melodies were lively and in
major keys, including Root's "Hazel Dell," as were songs by Septimus
Winner, Stephen Foster, and H.S. Thompson. As Carder chronicles Root's
journeys throughout America and the attitudes, political and artistic,
that he encountered, she describes his professional relationships with
composers Lowell Mason and William Bradbury, publishers Chauncey Marvin
Cady and Nathan Richardson, and to a lesser extent, Henry Clay Work,
Louis Moreau Gottschalk, and Dwight L. Moody.

The book is very readable, and written in a historical and biographical
style. Carder presents a detailed, yet interesting biography of Root.
The book contains images of sheet music covers, and some notated music,
but is not analytical in the harmonic sense, so it remains accessible to
non-musical historians.


[^1]:  Carder's dissertation was a similar title (Carder, Polly. George Frederick Root: Pioneer Music Educator: His Contributions to Mass Instruction in Music. Diss. University of Maryland, 1971).
