---
layout: article
title: "Review: Virginia Broughton: The Life and Writings of a National
Baptist Missionary"
author: "Kimberly D. Hill"
author-first: Kimberly D.
author-last: Hill
author-note: "Kimberly D. Hill is an assistant professor of history at
Del Mar College."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "Virginia W. Broughton. <em>Virginia Broughton: The Life and Writings of a
National Baptist Missionary</em>. Edited by Tomeiko Ashford Carter.
Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2010. 121 pp. ISBN
9781572336964."
---

Tomeiko Carter offers access to an influential figure in African
American religious history by editing the works of Virginia Broughton.
Broughton served as a missionary in Tennessee from 1887 until her death
in 1934. She worked as a teacher in the Memphis school system before
becoming a traveling educator for a Bible Institute and a missions
program called the Fireside schools. Her work with the Fireside schools
established Virginia Broughton's reputation as a Christian leader and
missionary. She went on to publish a curriculum of Christian Education,
two pamphlets about Christian service for women, and an autobiography.
These activities placed Broughton at the forefront of the American
women's mission movement.

Carter has published the first collection of Virginia Broughton's
pamphlets and *National Baptist Union* articles. *Virginia Broughton:
The Life and Writings of a National Baptist Missionary* is an ideal
complement to the only book published by Broughton, *Twenty Years'
Experience of a Missionary* (1907). Carter published this book in order
to "explore the multidimensionality of Virginia Broughton's identity and
the identities of the women with whom Broughton worked and served"
(xxxvi). She accomplished this goal in several ways. The book provides
evidence of Broughton's constancy in mission work, while including clues
to the origins of her dedication: the strong interest in education
shared by her parents and siblings, her experiences as an educator, and
her advocacy of female Christian leadership.

Carter searched archives, Fisk University records, and family papers to
present a clear chronology of Broughton's life. Details about
Broughton's birth date and lineage were unclear in the autobiography, so
Carter's introduction gives scholars valuable insight into Broughton's
early life. Carter also includes articles from the National Baptist
Union that provide historical context for Broughton's activism. The
comments from Nannie Helen Burroughs, corresponding secretary of the
National Baptist Woman's Convention, and from the National Baptist Union
editorial board connect Broughton to pivotal moments in the history of
Black Baptist women and southern race relations.

Carter's edited volume includes themes that are often isolated in
historical studies of Christian professional women during the Jim Crow
era. Previous scholarship on this topic has focused on educators, social
workers, missionaries, and reformers between 1880 and
1920.[^1] Of those leaders, Broughton is most often compared
with African American women who served as traveling
ministers.[^2]  Historians describe this period as a pinnacle
for American women's activism and a low point in American race
relations. Broughton's writings show how she knit both of these issues
into her ministry with the belief that "the standard of any race is
based upon the virtue and integrity of its women" (31). To improve life
for all African Americans, Broughton focused on educating black women
and empowering them for Christian service.


Virginia Broughton performed her mission work on behalf of the largest
Black Baptist denomination, the National Baptist Convention. Evelyn
Brooks Higginbotham featured Broughton in *Righteous Discontent* as one
of many Baptist women who defied expectations to promote female
ministry.[^3]  The articles in *Virginia Broughton* will help
readers discern different stages in the professional relationship
between Broughton and other leaders of the National Baptist Woman's
Convention. Cooperative service with white Baptist women was also a key
feature in the work of the Woman's Convention. Keith Harper published
edited volumes featuring the two female leaders most responsible for
making women's mission work part of the white Southern Baptist
Convention.[^4]  Carter adds to the historiography of Southern
Baptist women by including a 1903 *National Baptist Union*article about
the financial partnership between black and white Baptist women. By
writing instructional articles about mission work and Christian service,
Broughton raised interest for the home missions projects endorsed by
Annie Armstrong and Nannie Helen Burroughs. Glenda Gilmore's *Gender and
Jim Crow* featured this type of joint social project as an important
development in American racial politics*.*[^5]  This argument
also rings true in Carter's book, where we see the seamless connection
that Virginia Broughton drew between spiritual activism and social
change.

The book divides Virginia Broughton's publications into five sections.
The first section contains Broughton's first autobiography, which has
never been published in book form before. In it, Broughton argued that
women's mission work was the best way to "evangelize and educate the
masses."[^6]  Her emphasis on broad social change fit the
contemporary tradition of racial uplift and civilizing missions, but she
added a unique spin on tradition by advocating female leadership. The
second section is from a 1904 booklet titled *Woman's Work* which
displays Broughton's skill in Biblical analysis and female-centered
theology. The following sections build on her autobiography and theology
to show how Broughton practiced her ministry goals.

As the guest writer for the National Baptist Women's Convention,
Broughton sought to increase the visibility of the denomination's
missions efforts and increase female participation in the movement.
Section three includes several articles from Broughton's "Christian and
Educational Training Course" series in the *Baptist Union*. Carter also
includes articles from the *Baptist Union* editors and Nannie Helen
Burroughs to indicate how Broughton's articles incited a controversy
over National Baptist women's claims to denominational resources.
Section four contains systematic Bible Studies that Broughton provided
to teach women and train future missionaries. Section five gives readers
a glimpse into the ways that Broughton continued her missionary
endeavors in her seventies.

*Virginia Broughton* offers readers the rare opportunity to observe how
a black female minister interpreted her public role. Through the
published pamphlets and *Baptist Union* articles, we see the progression
of Broughton's thoughts on Baptist missions and female leadership over
nineteen years. Broughton's 1907 autobiography has been used as an
example of how a professional Black woman understood her ministry. But
most of the other records for Black female ministers before or during
Broughton's lifetime are limited to one or two published sources or
intermittent articles. Inferences about these women's early perspectives
must be made by interpreting a source written later in life. However,
with *Virginia Broughton* we can read how she understood her spiritual
calling in 1895 (when she was entering her fortieth year) and observe
how that personal awareness blossomed through her Baptist training
curriculum into an exceptional expression of womanist Christianity in
her *Woman's Work* booklet. The systematic Bible studies in Chapter 4
also show readers the means that Broughton used to accomplish her
missions goals. Though these Bible studies do not mention personal
details of Broughton's life, the structure of the studies displays her
education and attention to detail.

As the final article related to mission work, Carter included a tribute
published by the Tennessee branch of the National Baptist women's
missionary convention. The convention praised Virginia Broughton in 1929
by writing, "Because of her intellectual advantages and religious
fervor, she has not exalted herself but humbled herself and become one
with those who did not have her advantages, and helped them to see the
light" (92). This compliment praises Broughton's dedication through a
Biblical reference to Christ.[^7]  The tribute also captures
the overall message of Carter's book. Broughton's collected works
display her skills as an educator and a writer, as well as her
commitment to what she considered a God-given spiritual purpose. Tomeiko
Carter, who plans to publish more of Broughton's writings, has
represented her subject's tireless ministry and provided resources to
allow future scholars to delve further into the history of African
American female missionaries.


[^1]:  The book-length studies include Glenda Gilmore, *Gender and Jim Crow*: *Women and the Politics of White Supremacy in North Carolina*, 1896-1920 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996); Colleen McDannell, *The Christian Home in Victorian America, 1840-1900* (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986); Louise Michele Newman, *White Women's Rights: the Racial Origins of Feminism in the United States* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999); Peggy Pascoe, *Relations of Rescue: The Search for Female Moral Authority in the American West, 1874-1939*(New York: Oxford University Press, 1990); Rhonda Anne Semple, *Missionary Women: Gender, Professionalism and the Victorian Idea of Christian Mission* (Rochester, N.Y.: The Boydell Press, 2003); and Stephanie J. Shaw, *What a Woman Ought to Be and to Do* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996). 

[^2]:  Richard J. Douglass-Chin, *Preacher Woman Sings the Blues: The Autobiographies of Nineteenth-Century African American Evangelists* (Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 2001); *Spiritual Narratives,*ed.Sue Houchins (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988). 

[^3]:  Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, *Righteous Discontent: The Women's Movement in the Black Baptist Church, 1880-192* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1994), 125-133. 

[^4]:  Keith Harper,*Send the Light: Lottie Moon's Letters and Other Writings* (Macon, Ga.: Mercer University Press, 2002); Keith Harper, *Rescue the Perishing: Selected Correspondence of Annie W. Armstrong* (Macon, Ga.: Mercer University Press, 2004). 

[^5]:  Glenda Gilmore, *Gender and Jim Crow*: *Women and the Politics of White Supremacy in North Carolina*, 1896-1920 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996).

[^6]: Virginia Broughton, "Autobiography," *Virginia Broughton: The Life and Writings of a National Baptist Missionary,* ed. Tomeiko Ashford Carter. (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2010), 5.

[^7]: Phil. 2:5-8. The Bible. New King James Version.
