---
layout: article
title: "Reading Religious Belief as Working-Class Intellectual History"
author: "Jarod Roll"
author-first: Jarod
author-last: Roll
author-note: "Jarod Roll is a lecturer in American history at the
University of Sussex."
vol: 13
year: 2011
---

It seems somewhat curious in retrospect that I should find myself
contributing to this roundtable on the importance of class in the study
of southern religion. That is because I have spent most of the past ten
years thinking and writing about how important it is that scholars take
religious belief seriously in the study of labor and working-class
history. In my work, most recently *Spirit of Rebellion: Labor and
Religion in the New Cotton South*(University of Illinois Press, 2010)
and *The Gospel of the Working Class: Labor's Southern Prophets in New
Deal America*, coauthored with Erik S. Gellman (University of Illinois
Press, 2011), I have tried to straddle both fields by telling stories
that track the wider political, cultural, and intellectual impact of
religious change in the lives of poor people in the United States,
particularly the South, in the first half of the twentieth century. To
give a short version of the long answer that follows, I will say that an
attention to class in the history of southern religion bids us to think
more thoroughly and creatively about the wider role of faith as lived by
believers, whether rich or poor, in all aspects of their existence,
especially their intellectual lives.

The path that brought me to that conclusion began in what may seem like
a strange place, the papers of the *Appeal to Reason*, the most popular
socialist newspaper in the early twentieth century, published in Girard,
Kansas. I had spent the summer of 2000 writing an index and finding aid
for the collection at Pittsburg State University and decided, as a
first-year graduate student, to write my initial research paper on the
grassroots socialist movement in rural southeast Missouri in the two
decades after 1900. I found that the tenant farmers and wage workers who
gave their electoral support to the Socialist Party of Eugene V. Debs
blended their democratic voice with a gendered, racist rhetorical
assault on corporate power in the countryside that ultimately led to a
series of violent attacks on African American farmers and local
landowners. My most surprising finding, however, was that dynamic
crosscurrents---social, cultural, ideological, and political---linked the
rural socialist movement to the thriving Pentecostal tent revivals that
were then attracting rural poor people throughout the area. Here were
socialists praising, joining with, and using the same scripture as
Pentecostals; there were Pentecostals preaching at revival meetings to
groups of socialists and other workers, and then joining with them to
threaten and beat up a despised plantation owner. Finally, there were
socialists and Pentecostals in court together, and later in jail, as
local elites worked to eliminate them as threats. Both sets of
radicals---religious and political---were considered equally dangerous by
the dominant classes. These findings confounded my understanding at the
time on two counts, namely that socialists were uninterested in religion
and that southern Christians, especially Pentecostals, were resolutely
apolitical, if not outright antagonistic to worldly affairs. The
evidence that I found demanded new thinking that considered stories
about labor and stories about faith as parts of a larger whole
separated, in many instances, by only the fuzziest of lines.

As I developed this approach while preparing what would become *Spirit
of Rebellion*, it became clear that the strength of the boundary
demarcating working-class religion from working-class politics depended
on the sources that I was looking at. It is perhaps an obvious point,
but in this case I think it merits emphasis: historians get to sources
through the questions that they ask, but it is important that historians
do not let their original questions restrict the way they read the
sources that turn up. I did not find club-wielding, Debs-voting
Pentecostal evangelists by reading *Word and Witness* or *Christian
Evangel* or any other early Pentecostal newspaper. Rather, I found them
in local circuit court proceedings and trial coverage in local
newspapers as I tried to understand the demise of the socialist movement
in the area. The discovery prompted me to go back and ask new questions
of my evidence on socialism and to dig into the record of early
Pentecostal revival in the rural South and ask new questions of the
sources I found there, including revival reports in papers like *Word
and Witness*. In short, I learned that I could not adequately tell the
full story of working-class peoples' thought and action without
including the central role of their faith, particularly their attraction
to Pentecostal revival, or understand the role of Pentecostal belief
outside of the social and economic context of the people who held it.

It is easy, I think, to get stuck in institutional or organizational
stories when writing the history of either southern religion or southern
labor, mainly because institutions have provided the richest sources---in
some cases the only sources---still available. Whether one is talking
about unions or denominations, the records that we usually begin with
are very similar: institutional correspondence, policy debates and
pronouncements, newsletters and newspapers, membership files, financial
records and so on. Such sources provide a basic narrative and
chronology, they usually mirror an institution's rise and fall, and they
generally tell their own version of the story. It makes a very inviting
mix for historians, especially those working within a context of source
scarcity. The papers of the Southern Tenant Farmers' Union are a good
example. Copied on over sixty reels of microfilm, accompanied by a
superb finding aid and widely available, the collection describes in
remarkable detail the efforts of African American and white farmers in
the rural South to organize in the 1930s to protest their poverty and
lack of full citizenship. For any scholar interested in southern
labor---particularly in the fields---the correspondence, minutes, membership
rolls, and newspapers collected in the STFU papers are a godsend. By a
long shot, they contain more information on the social, economic, and
political lives of the rural poor than any other single source. But---and
it took me some time to learn this fact---the collection does not tell us
everything about working-class life in the South. It especially does not
explain how the people who joined the STFU came to do so, where they
came from, where they went after its demise, and, most importantly I
think, how their union involvement fit within their worldview.

In older tellings of the history of the STFU---tellings that were
over-reliant on the institutional source base---the fact that many
meetings occurred in rural churches and that many locals were led by
African American and white preachers was explained as a function of
organizing strategies laid down by the union's secular leadership: the
best way to organize southerners, the union's leaders and first
generation of historians said, was to reach them through their
preachers, who would bring in whole congregations of this naturally
religious folk. Had I not already gone through the process of connecting
socialist groups to Pentecostal revival, as discussed above, I might
have left it at that too. But I noticed while reading local meeting
reports that a large number of STFU members claimed Pentecostal,
holiness, or Primitive Baptist affiliations, and that these churches
were often the places where their union locals met.

In other words, the organizational history quickly broke down: something
else, something bigger, was going on in those meetings that had to do
with much more than a single labor union or a single denomination. The
Christians who joined the STFU were, for the most part, not members of
the mainstream denominations: the Southern Baptists, Southern
Methodists, Southern Presbyterians, or even the African Methodist
Episcopal Church. Rather, the politics of the STFU and its members were
closely linked to the same explosive set of theological and
eschatological beliefs I discovered while working on rural socialism.
The people who joined the union as a way to reject earthly exercises of
economic and political power also seemed to belong to rebellious
churches that rejected the authority and control of church elites in the
big, established denominations. What is more, many of these people
challenged Jim Crow racial divisions as part of their labor and/or
religious rebellion. Their sense of spiritual empowerment transcended
institutional structures, union and church. What I aimed to do in
*Spirit of Rebellion* was to capture this bigger picture by showing how
rural southerners developed and deployed new spiritual power to resist
the destruction of their way of life, as they knew it, amid the dramatic
transformations that reshaped southern agriculture and rural communities
in the first half of the twentieth century.

Although the history I set out to explore went well beyond any one
organization, the sources usually did not. As a result I had to find a
way to reconstruct the theological context of working-class mobilization
as well as analyze the power dimensions within and between
denominational churches, old and new. I began to wonder more consciously
about scripture, especially the specific biblical references and
exegetical passages I found in union and other political sources.
Historians working on almost anything southern will know what I mean:
records of meetings or gatherings frequently contain reference to
scriptural passages, mostly read aloud either for group exposition or
contemplation. Because they are so abbreviated, even cryptic, in
appearance, these references are easy to pass over or attribute to a
general religiosity with no specific significance; a favorite example is
a brief 1932 report in the *Negro World* of a Garveyite meeting in
Kinston, North Carolina, that tells in passing how participants read
from the "gospel" of the 66th chapter of Isaiah. Once I cracked open my
Bible and began reading the full passages mindful of the social and
political context, I realized that these specific references could
provide an abridged transcript to a system of thought and belief that
might, with some care, be pieced back together. The Garveyite use of
Isaiah 66 looks rather innocuous until you read the scripture, which
reveals a history of explosive thought. Throughout the 1920s, rural
Garveyites crafted a vision of deliverance that promised eventual
earthly redemption for all black people through the diligent work of a
few on behalf of the whole race. They used biblical scripture, for
example, Exodus 3:16--17, to articulate and elaborate this gradualist
vision. By the early 1930s, however, with their movement in disarray,
Garveyites continued to work for racial redemption but increasingly
imagined their deliverance as violent, immediate, and exclusive. Their
reading of Isaiah 66 forecast salvation for a righteous remnant of true
believers (those who remained loyal to Garvey) but promised the total
destruction of the unjust, white enemies and black apostates
alike.[^1]  This is just one example from a body of theological
and eschatological ideas that, when reconstructed and taken together,
casts an entirely new critical light on the political and spiritual
vision that motivated rural working people to challenge the status quo.

What I found in this working-class theological history was a surprising
world of intellectual depth and innovation that has become the central
focus of my work as a historian of southern labor and faith. In *Spirit
of Rebellion* and most lately in *The Gospel of the Working Class*, I
have aimed to reconstruct and track the ideas that cross the
interpretative space normally occupied by more familiar categories of
class and religion, especially as these ideas form or reflect larger
systems of thought, what we might refer to as cosmologies. By cosmology
I mean the intellectual constellation of beliefs, faiths, theologies,
and eschatologies that structure and animate the way people think about
God, work, justice, politics, and community and the ways people act (or
not) according to those thoughts. In the New South period, the dominant
cosmology among white southerners was a broad consensus that linked
white supremacy, gendered respectability, and social and economic
hierarchy in the function of both church and state. As my work on
socialist Pentecostals showed, this cosmology was not without its
ruptures and contradictions. For me, at least, those moments of
cosmological weakening, when chaotic social conditions and new,
rebellious ideas prompted people to challenge reigning authority, are
the most fertile moments for exploring the surprising interactions
between religious faith and the politics of class.

Historians of southern religion have produced a rich body of work that
explores the role of power---economic, gendered, and racial---in the
dynamics of faith. As a labor historian I have relied on these
scholars---Paul Harvey, Adele Oltman, Harvey Cox, Donald G. Matthews,
Randall J. Stephens, Vincent Harding, Joe Creech, Robert H. Craig,
Wilson Jeremiah Moses, and Albert J. Raboteau, to name a few---as I tried
to get a better grasp on the lives and minds of southern workers. My
fellow contributors to this roundtable, with their excellent work, are
already taking the field in fascinating new directions, deepening what
we thought we knew and breaking new ground too. Rather than say that
southern religionists should think harder about class, or emphasize it
more, I will conclude by saying that by bringing discussions of class
and religion together we can break outside the comfortable but narrow
confines of organizations, be they churches or unions, and in the
process open up the wonderful, heterodox world of ideas that inspired
some southerners to challenge the status quo in a range of ways, some
productive, some not. The southern intellectual tradition is diverse and
deep and scholars have only just begun to understand its fullness.
Historians of southern religion should be encouraged that they work in a
field at the cutting edge of that endeavor.

[^1]:  For the full argument, see Jarod Roll, "Garveyism and the Eschatology of African Redemption in the Rural South, 1920-1936," *Religion and American Culture: A Journal of Interpretation* 20 (Winter 2010): 27--56.
 
